## The Pyrenees

It was festival time in the city. People were singing in the streets, and the balconies were covered with
flowers. Through one of the narrow cobblestone alleys a knight was pulling his horse along by the bridle. He kept running into
people rattling tambourines, blowing trumpets and playing flutes. They all wore bright costumes. In an arcade he met a
young girl and asked her what was happening. She told him it was a fiesta in honor of May, and then she added, "It may be
the last one we'll have, because Friar Domingo has banned the nightingale." She explained that the nightingale told her
whether her lover would visit her when her husband was away.
The flowers were supposed to keep evil away from Carcassonne.

"Tell me," said the knight, "do you know where Archdeacon Sans Morlane lives? I want to see him."

She told him that he was a Cathar in hiding from the Inquisition. She also said it would be particularly hard to find him since everyone was in disguise for May Day. Husbands were
lovers and lovers husbands. Everything was topsy-turvy.

"That's the way life really is," murmured the knight.

Just then an old man who had overheard the conversation came up to them, "This is the ancient feast of the Queen of the
May," he announced, He then took off his mask, turned into a youth and kissed the girl. It became evident that the youth was

really a girl and that the other young 'girl the knight had questioned was returning her kisses with passion. "I'll never know who you are, but I know I love you," she said. It turned out
she was a troubadour.

In the evening the knight finally succeeded in meeting Sans Morlane. He found him in the basilica near the left-hand door,
wearing a blue cape and standing on a gravestone. The knight approached and told him he wanted to go to Montsegur.

"Are you a Cathar?" he asked. 'Have you received the Consolamentum?"

"No," he replied, "but I've had a dream of love. I've seen her beckoning me on the other side of a drawbridge. She was
trying to tell me a secret. I've got to cross that bridge so I can enter one of the five gates of the castle."

"But Montsegur has only two entrances," he answered, "one on the north and one on the south. In fact, there's really only
one, since the northern entrance is reserved for those who are known as the Perfect Ones.'

"I kept hearing two names in my dream," the knight persisted, ""Montabor and Montsegur."

'But are you a Cathar?"

"Of course. How else could I know your name, know about your death and see you standing here on your tombstone?"

"You're right," he said. "Only someone who lives in the future can visit here without endangering us. Very well, you
should go to Fanjeaux, where the last Cathar lives. It will take you seven hundred years to find him. His name is Roques
Marceau. You should also try to see Esclarmonde de Foix."

The knight then left the flowery city of Carcassonne and rode toward Fanjeaux, passing through patches of mist and
hearing sounds of war preparations along the way. Finally, in an isolated place he found the last Cathar, Roques Marceau. He
looked into his eyes and there was no need to say anything. The two men recognized each other.

"We've met before," he said. "Haven't you already come to

see me, to have your horoscope read or to have me sketch the colors of your soul? The boy who hands me my brushes isn't
here just now."

"No, I've only come to ask the way to Montsegur."

"Always asking about mountains. I told you once before that Montsegur is not outside but inside. Why do you keep searching in the external world?"

"I must. Besides, I also want to see Esclarmonde. Didn't she build Montsegur?"'

"Yes," he replied, "she did what her dreams told her to do." Roques Marceau then led the knight to a place in the
Rua de Castello where seven hundred years earlier the castle of Fanjeaux had stood.

"But there's nothing here but ruins," said the knight; "hardly one stone on another."

"You've come back too late,'" he replied. "It's been centuries since the castle of Montsegur was captured and destroyed."

The knight paused for a while, looking at the ruins and wondering whether he was dreaming of the past or the future.

His meditations were soon interrupted by the last Cathar.
"Since you're here," he said, "I'll tell you a secret. It's really your own destiny. At the bottom of Montsegur a beautiful girl
lies asleep. No one has ever wakened her. She is being kept asleep there by the Perfect Ones, who are waiting for a savior
to come from far away. When she wakes, Montsegur will be destroyed and the Perfect Ones will die in the flames."

"But I've come to save Montsegur, not to destroy it. I certainly won't wake her up."

"The Perfect Ones know what they're doing; they don't make mistakes. They act according to their destiny and are guided by
someone else who thinks and dreams their existence. Perhaps they are guided by this girl. For them the destruction of Montsegur would be a triumph. Therefore you must go to this girl
and make her your mistress. That's the only way to save Montsegur now."

Deeply troubled, the knight left the last Cathar. He was hungry and tired, and went to an inn, where he asked for wine
and bread. A troubadour sat at a nearby table. 'Long ago," he said, "we carved temples, but now we make them in our verses."

"You believe in reincarnation? Don't you know it's forbidden?"

"The Perfect Ones believe in it," he replied, "and that's enough for me, Just now we're not allowed to mention it in
our songs, but if Montsegur survives, you'll see the idea widely accepted, even though the Perfect Ones doubt whether it should
be extended to everyone. Only those who have received the Consolamentum really understand it."

"Have you received it?"

"I'm blind," said the troubadour.

"Why don't you sing us a song, then?"

And so the troubadour began:

I shall build a castle

as carefully as I can

with trees and flowers

and gardens full of birds

In the tall towers

of the castle up above

the knight will find his lady and symbols of his love.

The first door is open

but the second's always closed That's to let her test

the devotion of the knight

to see if he is worthy

to awaken her delight.

The open doors and windows let the cool air in,

for the walls are dark and heavy like love without an end

Even the open fire seems cold compared to the flame of love.

Whoever gains this palace finds peace at the last

No foe will succeed

in breaking down its walls This is the sacred message

I bring from afar away.

The troubadour stopped. Opposite him the knight had fallen asleep with his head on his arms, hunched over the wooden
table. He was dreaming of the drawbridge. A girl dressed in white appeared on the other side. She was calling to him:
"Hurry, cross the bridge. You and I are one."

Afterward the knight wandered alone in the mountains, where he eventually came upon a cave. There he stayed for
days and months. The troubadour would come and bring him food, and after a while he became a continual though unobtrusive companion. One day he told the knight he had done
well to stay in a cave. He said that the Perfect Ones carved signs on the walls of their caves centuries ago. They made
pictures of human. faces, fish and doves.

Little by little the knight began to perceive a face on the rock wall. It was 2 woman's, and strangely familiar. The man
was alarmed, not knowing who had carved it, or who it represented, but something made him adore it.

In the distance a stream tan by, and in the evening the knight would listen to it. He thought he heard voices coming from a
faraway time and place. Meanwhile, in the dark air of his cave hung a message he could not understand.

Once again the troubadour began to sing:

In the words of Percival when he was still alive

"Be strong and brave. Don't ask whom you serve

else you'll soon lose

the lance and the Grail."

When I see you, Lady,

I forget all else

T only want to speak, to beg But this I cannot do,

I live all day in dreams.

Encouraged by the thin air of the cave, the knight also began to live in dreams. Little by little he became obsessed by the face
he saw on the cavern wall. He would repeatedly ask it questions.
Then finally the shadowy face began to loosen itself from the wall, As this went on, the image of a woman's body began to
take shape at the entrance of the cave. It didn't have a face but approached him and went up to the stone face, which it lifted
up and placed on its own body.

"Now I can finally speak," it said. "I will speak in the name of all the others because I am the master of their masters. I
control the Perfect Ones in all their being. I come from a great distance. With the help of the Cathars and the troubadours I
shall take possession of this whole region. I am the Mother, and I alone know the secret."

The knight belicved he had heard these words in some other place and grew anxious to meet the Perfect Ones and ask them
directly. Then he remembered that the troubadour had told him to hurry, since what he was dealing with might easily disappear.
Moreover, the Cathars were not likely to reveal their secrets to strangers. He then went out to the edge of the cave and
shouted for the troubadour, but all he heard was the echo of his own voice. Finally he fell asleep on the grass,

At dawn the troubadour brought him goat's milk. The knight asked him where he'd been and told him how he'd called out
for him. He then asked how much longer he would have to remain in the cave: he was anxious to go to Montsegur. There
was little time left, for the castle v was utider siege. He was desperate to be on his way.

The troubadour replied that it took at least twenty years of training to be ready. "How long have you been here?" he asked.

"A few centuries," answered the knight. "Let me see, we are

now in the year 1244, and I came here from Asia in 900. Yet in a sense I feel I've been here only a few minutes."

Spring and summer passed by with the help of the troubadour.
The power of art over nature was enough to sing the time away and jumble the seasons. Here is one of his songs:

When the days grow long in May I listen to the nightingale

and when J walk at dusk

I consider my love, so far away.
I'm so sad and'bent with desire that neither song nor flower
cheers my wintry heart.

Snow began to fall, and icicles formed at the entrance of the cave. Nevertheless the knight did not feel cold. He wasn't
really there any more. His body felt like an icicle, but his mind traveled, and moved with the swiftness of a living bird.

His first flight took him to the foot of a mountain where he began to climb a narrow path, Far above he could see a stone
house. After a while he entered a small courtyard containing a pair of gates that guarded a tunnel leading into the mountain.
He left his horse outside and opened the gates. Inside, the passageway was lit by a light that seemed to have no soutce.
At the end of the tunnel thete was a round room. A small door opened, and the knight entered. Inside, the room was
brightly lit with mirrors that rose tier on tier to the top of the mountain. The knight realized he was not involved in personal
ot historical time. He was climbing a mountain of the mind on the other side of an event, passing through centuries, in the
light's shadow. He stared up through the long passage that led to the top of the mountain, and there he saw someone looking at him from one of the windows of the stone house, This
person said, "Traveler, go back; return to your own time."

Below, at the foot of the mountain, stretched a lake of deep green water.

Yet even if there were no relationship to the time or place of Montsegur, the knight's adventures must have had something
to do with it, otherwise he could not have continued as he did.
Once again he undertook his quest for Montsegur, and he found it in a special sense, even though he made a mistake in
time, What he saw at the top of the mountain were the ruins of the castle of Montsegur. All that remained were a few stone
walls, He climbed up from the foot of the mountain to look at them. It was a brilliant blue day, and the light made the snow
luminous. After a while he passed by a stone inscribed with a date and a few words. He continued on, climbing up the
steep hillside. It became increasingly difficult as he pushed through the snow and ice, and in the end he decided he had to
go back down. He returned in a dismal mood. From time to time he would stop to look back at the stone ruins at the top of the
mountain,

When he reached the place where he had first glimpsed the ruins, he paused to look at them for the Jast time. He realized
he had not seen a single person or animal all day, only the old stone walls of Montsegur, Then he thought he saw something
reaching out from those ruins toward the blue sky. It looked as though a pair of arms were praying or imploring someone
for help. As he watched he felt he was receiving a message from another world, a region of extraordinarily pure light
sending him a sign of love. The sight of these stone arms, whether they existed or not, silhouetted against the snow of the
mountain peaks, moved him deeply, and he accepted the signal, not dating to interrupt the vision with a gesture of any kind.
It was true he had not reached the summit. He had come at the wrong time. But the experience made him realize that his
effort had been recognized. They would not let him reach the top, but they expected him to try. With this understanding,
the knight understood that he was not yet prepared for the ultimate test. He would have to go back to the cave and contemplate the Mother's face.

When he returned, he discovered that the face had disappeared. He looked everywhere for it, following the fissures and scraping aside the snow and ice with his bare hands. Then
he began to doubt whether a woman had ever-come into the _ cave and put the head on her own body, like a mask. But in
the midst of his doubis a new figure appeared. She came into the cave with bare feet, wearing a long white gown which
neatly reached the ground. Without touching the stalactites, she made her way into the interior of the cave and walked over to
the place where the woman's face had been., As she walked, her eyes were open and her arms hung down by her sides.

"I've come down from the mountain even though I am asleep. I've been sleeping for ages and have been waiting for
you to wake me up. Unless you do that here in your cave, Montsegur will never be destroyed.'

But ['ve come to defend Montsegur," exclaimed the knight.

 You won't be saved until it's destroyed," she replied. With her arms extended she moved toward the knight. As she approached, she seemed to emahate a perfume of flowers from
another world, a distillation from ancient tombs. The knight trembled and tears ran down his cheeks. When he looked at
her hand in the half-light of the cave he saw a little white spot between her fingers.

Leprosy, he thought. I've seen it in another world.

With that he knelt down before the woman. "I'll do what you want," he satd. "Til obey your -wishes and follow you about.
Then one day I'll awaken you and Montsegur will be destroyed. I don't want any help from God unless it comes through you.

She had slept for more than three centuries at the base of the mountain on which the castle of Montsegur was built. The
Perfect Ones had found her sleeping there and had left her alone because they knew that once she was disturbed, their

castle would be destroyed. They were aware this would eventually happen and were serene about it. At times they almost wished for it.

Few knew of the room where she lay, or the secret passage that led to it at the foot of the mountain. It was a dark, bare
toom and she was stretched out.on a stone platform and covered with a transparent veil, like a bride. Her arms were crossed
on her breast, her hair hung down on either side and her feet were bare. She looked alive enough to make people realize
she was only asleep.

Sometimes in the middle of the night she would open her eyes and unfold her hands, She would gather up her hair and
move about the room, She even walked up the passageway that led to the top of the mountain. The Perfect Ones who guarded
the castle knew immediately when she had risen from her bed, or tomb, at the foot of the hill. They did nothing. They would
merely watch with ecstasy and wonder, overcome by the mystery of her existence. More than one knight guarding the castle
sighed as he watched her walk along the battlemehis or pause at a sentry fire as though she were warming herself. Then with
her open blind eyes she would stare out over the valley and river below in hope of finding the knight who would come at
last.

After theit first encounter she went away for a long time.
The troubadour then came with his lute, sat down next to a tree outside the cave and began to speak: ""You're now the supplicant. What you are going through was revealed to me by the
first troubadour. He received the message from a falcon perched on a golden branch of one of the oldest trees in Eden." He then
repeated the message he had heard: 'Only he who is prepared will reach Montsegur." And with that he left.

Finally she came. Standing asleep in the snow outside the cave, she statted to speak to the knight. "Let's sit and talk,"
she said. "You can do what you want with me. I won't defend myself."'

The knight responded quietly. "It's who am at your feet, hoping to be a mirror for your beautiful image. I hope somehow that my words will get through to your dreams. Your
beautiful whiteness and purity justify my long pilgrimage.
Moreover, I can see bloodstains and wounds on your delicate feet. They're also covered with sand from the deseris you've
been crossing for centuries. Your long legs are like the columns of a temple or like the long paths I walk along. Your stomach
is the valley of the moon where ancient tribes celebrate their ritual. Your breast is the summit of the mountain where you
sleep, your forchead is like the-crest of the moon seen from the northern gate of Montsegur. Your eyes are a bridge I've not
yet crossed but which brought a message that reached me during the darkest night. Your pale hands and fingers are scratched
by the rough tombs you've struggled to open for centuries." He then fell silent and she approached him with a shudder.
She opened her arms and stretched out her hands in search of his face. Her eyes were open, but they looked beyond him into
the night. |

"O my lover," she said, "if ever you become mine.. 1f ever a night comes when I may lie down by your side and clasp you
in my naked arms. I give you all my Jove, my eyes, my life." Her hands found his face. She pulled him toward her very
gently, and her lips touched his like a momentary feather of snow.

Then she left, passing over the surface of the ice as though walking along a ray of moonlight.

The troubadour continued to bring him food, He told him the castle of love had five entrances and that three remained to
be discovered. He also added that he would sing no more because there was nothing more to add to what the woman had already said.

The knight now entered a new stage of delight. He was filled with ecstasy, and his days and nights were marked by a
delicate awareness. He walked through the white forest and

whenever he was brushed by a snowflake or saw a bird take flight, he thought of the kiss he had received from his lady.
More and more he began to live in her. Her solitude became his, and he felt himself enveloped by her sleeping essence.

The troubadour then came to say that she would come that night. He told the troubadour to wait for her at the entrance
of the cave.

He imagined het getting ready to leave the castle. Still asleep, she removed her hands from her breast and rose from the
stone bed at the foot of the mountain.She moved silently through the dark passages, and the cold emanating from her
dimmed the fires as she passed by them. He knew she had entered the forest where his cave was because he felt himself
getting so chilled that his flesh burned with the cold. When she arrived, she looked deep into his eyes, without see ing anything. Then she let her gown fall slowly from her shoulders,
first revealing her breasis, and then the rest of her body. She stood before him naked, trembling and vibrating, but with a
triumphant smile on her face. In it he recognized the look of the Mother on the wail of the cave.

Without moving, and paralyzed by his fearful ecstasy, the knight gazed at the girl's body, murmuring a single word over
and over again, Her body exuded an intangible substance that penetrated him. He realized she possessed a magic power, and
his feelings went beyond those of love or desire. He was confronting a vision that emerged from the depths of time, and her silent presence contributed to his understanding.

When will this pale winter end? When will the snow melt, and the ice? Will the nightingale ever sing again?

Without hesitation she had come back to the knight's bed which was made of branches and skins. She was naked and
Jeaned over him to undress him. Then she Jay down by his side, crossed her arms over her breasis and gazed at the ceiling
of the cave without see ing him. Caught in her own dreams,

staring at her private sky, she began to speak.

"My knight," she said, "I've not come to you but you have come to me at the foot of the mountain, You've entered the
circular stone tomb where I lic dead or asleep. And now you must wake me up according to the directions I give you. Touch
me with your lips and hands. I need your caresses. Start with my hair, then take hold of my breasis, linger there for a while,
letting your fingers encircle them. They ate the fruit of a golden tree with two small suns that shine when touched by
the tip of your fingers. Press your lips softly on them and then move down to my stomach, which is the deep night sky. Put
your head there and listen to my shadowy heart. Then move your gentle hands down to my legs. I'll give you refuge in my
knees."

The girl trembled so much it seemed as though she might wake from her dream. Embracing the knight, she returned all
the warmth she had taken from him before, Her hands caressed him, touching centers that were dormant within him. Whole
worlds were aroused in his flesh. She had turned the key and was reviving the latent power of his flesh.

The knight kept his mind as empty as possible. He knew he had to let her play the active role. One mistake or indiscretion
would ruin everything. She would never again wake up. Montsepur would therefore be neither destroyed nor saved. He wondered how many knights must have failed this ultimate
test called Asag. |

"My lovec," he said with the greatest delicacy, "put your head here on my breast. You are ready to wake up from your
long sleep. We must therefore both begin to live in this new dimension, in this new condition of waking sleep."

Once again the Mother's face appeared on the wall of the cave. Insinuatingly it detached itself and approached the knight.
"Come, take me," it said. '"Take me like a warrior, a real knight. I'll give you my heart to devour and afterward we can
exchange blood."

Al

"It's too late now,' he replied. "I'm attached to another.
Love has only one purpose, and that is the fusion of hearts."

The woman's face faded from the wall. Once again the girl returned and pressed herself upon him, kissing him with open
lips. She sighed toward him and gave him her heart.

"Now you have two hearts," she said. "You must now give me yours so that I can live."

The knight then kissed her in the same way she had kissed him. He sighed toward her interior and gave her his heart.

Later, sitting at the entrance of the cave, the knight thought about what had happened. His heart was now in one piece
with her, and his spirit had its own identity. The heart is a mirtor where the lover sees his beloved.

The knight now entered Montsegur. He went into her heart, although he did not stop Living in the cave. He was in both
places at the same time. He knew everything that happened to her and expericneed her feelings. She also lived within him.
Flaving made the heart the center of their being, they changed their mode of consciousness. The knight dreamed her dreams
and shared her vision. He knew her sorrows and ecstasies, and she knew his. He now had a woman's heart and she a man's.
This fusion meant that each had a greater life: each had a heart with wings. They could move through space and visit the
castle, the cave, the base of the mountain where the enemy was camped, and no one could stop them. A substance as delicate
as a breath of air moved from her to him, and acquired its tangible life within him, so that the two were always mingled
together,

Finally the snows vanished. The knight came out of his cave and rode toward Montsepur. Since his heart was already there,
he knew the way. After a while the troubadour joined him, and the knight grected him, saying, "Let's go to the battle and
destroy everything that's perishable within us. You'd better sing us a song to help us get through the enemy lines."

The troubadour took up his lute and began to sing:

In hot summer have I great rejoicing

When the tempesis kill the earth's foul peace,

And the lightnings from black heav'n flash crimson, And the fierce thunders roar me their music

And the winds shriek through the clouds mad, opposing, And through ail the riven skies God's swords clash.

And I Jove to see the sun rise blood-crimson.
And I watch his spears through the dark clash And it fills all my heart with rejoicing

And pries wide my mouth with fast music When see him so scorn and defy peace,

Flis lone might 'gainst all darkness opposing.

And let the music of the swords make them crimson!*

They climbed the mountain path to the top, where they found the entrance to the castle of Montsegur. The drawbridge was
lowered. She stood on the other side and said, "We are one."

He was then able to cross the bridge.

The troubadour came in like his shadow. But his story ends here, for as he said to the knight before leaving, "Your story is
not a tale of love like ours: it is more secret and ancient. Yours is the solar story of loveless love that was lost in the Flood.
Uve only a glimmering of it. Our stories tell of love affairs between common men and queens, whereas yours are always
of exalted people, kings and queens. In the same way, your sleeping beauty is a queen and her lover a king."

Meanwhile the knight continued on, guided by his lady. He was greeted in a large square room by the knights of the castle.
They sat at a round table and each had at his side a companion.
His Jady crossed the citcle and stood beside him as he waited for whai was to come next. She then spoke.

"Dear love," she said, "what has happened to my heart?"

"It's here in my breast making two beats at a time, repeating

* Ezra Pound.

your name and mine. It's a looking-glass and also a sand-clock that tells me how much time I stil] have."

The knights seated around the table nodded their approval, and so he was allowed to enter the circle and sit with her
beside him as a defender of Montsegur.

Later she showed him the rooms of the castle, how it was defended and where its secret passages went. She also led him
to the hidden chamber at the base of the mountain where she had lain asleep for so long. High in the towers the view extended
over the Pyrenees. As they stood there in the late-afternoon light, she began to speak, She told him that for centuries these
mountains had been a refuge for holy men. When the great Flood drowned the continent of the god-men, and when the
third moon fell on the earth, the keys of their knowledge were saved and kept in the mountains. They were all that survived
from one world to another. The Grail was really a piece of Lucifer's stone crown that fell onto our planet. At his defeat,
his crown was broken into a thousand fragmehis and spread throughout the firmament. Only when they were all gathered
together would Lucifer be vindicated and return to the throne.
He is the morning star and the guardian of love. She explained that the stone that fell on earth was an essential part of the
broken crown. It shone brighter than the sun and was like frozen fire with its green and white light. It was able to unite
what is dispersed and to return everything to its source. Only those who walk backward can find it. It is a talisman that links
the individual with the morning star. For centuries this talisman has gone from hand to hand. Originally it came from the Ortent,
but it was taken from there and has finally come to this place.
When Montsegur falls, it will be sent to some distant land, perhaps to a place that is still unknown. 'In the meantime,"
she said, "Montsegut will always be special, for its story will pass down through the ages, transforming the lives of all who
know it."

She raised her hand to protect herself from the evening sun,

and once again he noticed the white mark between her fingeis.
Pointing toward the Pyrenees, she told him about the fortifted caves of Ornalac and of Black Mountain, where those in search
of the great secret were trained. She said that the whole valley was more or less a temple and that the center of the world was
wherever the talisman was kept. "We must move on," she _ concluded, "and carry the treasure from one place to another
untit it reaches its last refuge, Venus or the morning star, 'There we shall reconstruct a crown as beautiful as it was before it
was destroyed."

He explored the castle so as to find out as much as he could about its subterranean passages. He felt at home there, but
also somewhat constricted. He therefore asked her to lead him to the northern gate, so that he might visit the Perfect Ones
who lived outside it and prepare for the great battle that was to come,

She looked at him fixedly for a moment. Then she took him by the hand and led him into an empty corridor. He scon passed
through the northern gate of Montsegur, leaving her behind.

Outside there was complete silence, and the air was still and clear. An open terrace led to the edge of a cliff, while beyond
stood the glistening white mountains. Near the edge was a small group of cabins surrounded by bushes and low trees.
Everything was imbued with a faint lavender light.

He walked toward one of the cabins on the precipice. [t had no windows, but the door was open and he entered. In the
middle of the room, sitting cross-legged, was the Perfect One.
His eyes were fixed and open, and he had a vague smile on his face. He seemed to be in a trance, for when he spoke his
lips did not move, and the sound came from the roof of the room.

"Diaus vos benesiga, Come in."

For a long time nothing was said. Then, whether he spoke the words or not, the man asked where he was.

"Don't you sealize," came the reply, "that you're visiting

the ruins of a castle destroyed seven hundred years ago? All you're see ing is the ghostly shadow of something that hasn't
existed on earth for centuries. It exisis only in the light of a distant star. You are coming here from the future. You've
been able to cross intersecting planes of light. Perhaps you're in a parallel time in which Montsegur both exisis and is
destroyed. But the fall of Montsegur is always taking place, each time with a different luminosity. Even though these parallel times and planes cross one another, they do not touch. They
are like bells sounding in closed universes. What happens here on earth has already had a prior existence somewhere else
through some other concentration of light and continuum of time. You and I are taking part in the distant drama of Montsegur and at the same time are engaged in a personal drama
within ourselves."

The Perfect One sat motionless and a faint light played on his face. It seemed as though he then spoke again: "We were
opposed to marriage and to physical copulation because they gave birth to new bodies that could only be corrupted by nothineness and death. Instead we wanted a copulation of the mind,
a mental wedding of the sort performed in the secret ceremony inside the castle. That was the real initiation, the true secret
and treasure of Montsegur."'

They say that just before the castle fell, four knights succeeded in escaping by means of a silver rope. They took the treasure of Montsegur with them. Three of their names are
known. But the fourth is not.

