## The Andes

Ch midday sun filtered through the thick
leaves and ferns of the forest, making the air luminous and
green. Red copihue flowers were scattered among the pine trees,
and the atmosphere was suffused by the penetrating odor of
the dark forest.

The man rode along on a horse with a white star on tts
forehead. As he passed under the great trees, he thought how
open and benign the woods were, and how pleasant the mutmur of waterfalls and streams. The only danger came from the
light. It created a sense of longing, a dream of invisible beings
who had once inhabited the place and who might still be found
there. From time to time the horse stopped, widened its nostrils
and neighed, as though it sensed their presence.

They contiaued on until they emerged from the forest into
an open valley. Ahead of them rose the massive snow-covered
range of the Andes. At the end of a long day the man dismounted and tied his horse to a tree. He then walked toward
an opening that looked like a cave. A figure came out of it
and walked toward him with arms extended. He had a long
beard and was dressed in a poncho that flapped in the breeze.
He stared straight ahead, but when he came near the man he
stretched out his arms and placed them on his shoulders. Then
he ran his fingers over his face, and the man felt he had expetienced this once before, as though the fingers had modeled
his face in another age.

49

Later they sat down by the fire. He saw that the old man
was blind but that his dead eyes were blue. ‘I’m not surprised
that you’re blind,” he said, “but I didn’t expect you to have
blue eyes and white skin. I thought you’d be a wild man with
dark hair and Mongol features,” | |

“We'll talk of that later,’’. replied the old man, “but first
you must tell me why you came here.”

“I was told that a wise man lived in these parts who knew
all about herbs. I'm looking for an hetb that will cure a friend.
There’s some sort of medicinal root in this part of the world,
some lund of moss or resin that’s strong enough to save her.”

“There’s no herb that can cure her. Her illness is in her
blood.” The old man then spoke of the way in which vegetables
and minerals imitate the organs of the body. The lunpwott,
for example, is fibrous and very much like the lung itself. ‘The
copihue ts a bell flower full of blood, while the rose is coagulated blood, “There's a dead man,” he said, “hidden in these
mountains with a tose in his breast.”

“But I’ve come for medicine.”

The hermit was not to be silenced. ‘The loica bitd also has
a red breast,"’ he continued, ‘‘and she helps me find the cure.
But don’t worry: you don’t have to take the medicine directly
to her, All you have to de is touch it with your hand and then
touch her breast. This illness concerns her invisible body, not
her visible one. Illness is a disequilibrium between these two
bodies and the breath or current that unites them. The stars are
also important, for they have an influence on human bodies.
What's your friend’s birthstone?”

“Topaz,”

The hermit went on as though he had heard nothing. “The
South Pole sends out an orange-colored emanation,” he said,
‘and represents the earth’s sexual. organs. The left side of the
body also emits an orange light.”

“1 still don’t understand why you are white. I thought you'd
be an Indian.”

“Quetzalcoatl was also white. Don’t you know that America

50

was once called Albania? It was a white continent for white
gods. They preserved an immaterial substance here, a kind of
gold that you can drink. Perhaps that’s what you want for your
friend. It wili be easier for you to give it to her when she’s dead.”’

He then explained that there were two roads that could be
followed. The first was dry and felatively short. The second,
and longer, was known for being wet or moist. It was that way
because it was a road of tears.

The old hermit fell silent, and the man with him remembered
that somewhere he had eaten eae and silver leaves. But he
couldn’t recall where,

“The road I’ve been speaking about has pase abandoned for

a long time,” he said. “There are only a few traces left of it in
the highest mountains.” The flickering of the fire cast shadows
on the old man’s face. At last he spoke: ‘Take her this dried
flower which has been created by the fire.”

The man walked slowly through the city. By the time he
reached her house, the evening light was falling over the nearby
hills. She opened the door and led him by the hand into the
dark corridor. They had become friends because they were both
interested in finding the myth of their lives. They both belonged
to an order, but he didn’t know whether hers resembled his
own. It was nevertheless clear they had some common point of
origin and that their destinies were linked.

“You must rest,’’ he said. “It’s getting late, and you shouldn't
tire yourself,”’

She bowed her head, and he took her into the bedroom, where
he laid her on the bed. He covered her with a shawl and placed
cushions under her head. She had taken eff her ted robe and
wore only a white gown. Her blond hair was held in place by a
silver headband. She raised her hands to straighten her hair and
the sleeves of her gown slipped down, leaving het arms uncovered, They were thin, with delicate blue veins. Her long
nervous fingers disappeared for a moment into her golden hair.
She paused as though meditating and then smiled. He recog-

51

nized this special look which sometimes moved over her face.

“Wherc have you been?” she asked.

“T found a hermit in the south,” he answered, ‘who gave me
this dried flower for you. He said it was made of fire and
doesn’t lose its petals.” : :

“What else did he say?”

~He said that America was once called Albania, the land of
the white gods, of Quetzalcoatl, Kontiki and Vitacocha. Do you
know anything about that?’

“Yes,” she answered.

He sat down on the edge of the bed, and she began to speak,
holding one of his hands in her own. She told him that the
book of Enoch, a work that was written before the Flood,
speaks of a race of beings whose hair was like wool and
who had transparent skin. This race apparently came from
some other world and did not originate here. In the book,
the prophet Enoch is taken away from this world in a chariot of
fire. Other ancient writings also mention giants who ate supposed to have built the great stone monuments at Tiahuanaco,
Easter Island, Brittany, Stonehenge and many other places. They
made Cape Horn and Nan Matal in the Pacific near the Caroline
Islands, where there are nearly fifty artificial islands. These
giants were hermaphroditic.and had the essence of woman
within their hearts. Their right sides emitted a blue light, their
left an orange.

Then something happened. No one knows whether 2 moon
fell onto the earth or what other disaster took place, but the
giants were forced to disappear or hide in the mountains. To
this day they wait there for the return of the old sun that
warmed the world they knew.

Anothet explanation for this catastrophe is that the giants
fell in love with the daughters of men and ceased being hermaphroditic. According to this theory, the expulsion of their female powers created dual beings who were partly physical,
partly spiritual. There were now two races on earth, one half-hu-

52

man, half-divine, descended from the giants who consorted with
the daughters of men, the other the children only of human
beings. The first race was still linked to extraterrestrial powers
by a power called Vril. They had originally developed their
civilization in the north, on a great polar island whose capital
_ was Thule. It was surrounded by snow-capped mountains, but
the center was a warm green oasis. The men had white skin and
their hair was like wool. The women had long golden hair that
floated in the wind.

These arctic creatures were clairvoyant. They wore moonstones as a sign of their power and emeralds in honor of Venus.
They also introduced the practice of magic love, whose purpose
was to reunite opposites and join extremes together. Their
work symbolized a return to the world of giants; it was the
pilgrimage of the prodigal son to his lost home, a movement
to a point of ortgin beyond time. But this high civilization came
to an end. Thule vanished and the poles became uninhabitable.
The green oasis of the Hyperboreans disappeared.

“Was that where the mythical garden of golden apples was,
the one inhabited by smiling animals?” he asked.

“Animals also had their places in the heart of man,” she
answered, “while man was still complete. But not all of the
Hyperboreans died when Thule disappeared. Some went to the
mountains and established a civilization that flourished until it
was destroyed by another catastrophe. Finding that disasters
came in cyclical fashion, they built two underground cities in the
interior of the Himalayas. These were called Agharti and
Champula. There the survivors retained their link with extraterrestrial forces through Vril and continued to teach the ritual
of magic love. They also kept an emerald on whose sutface
was inscribed the unearthly wisdom of the Hyperboreans. Only
a few of the masters understood these characters. In Champula
they taught the magic that had made possible the construction
of Cape Horn and the Pacific islands aad other rocky promontories over the face of the earth. They tried to recreate the

+3

energies that had brought these things into being and hoped
to produce a mutation of the species that would enable the
giants to return to their original forms before they were cortupted by the children of men.

“These events are of course symbolic and represent an internal
development. The transparent’ white skins, the woolen hair of
the men and golden tresses of the priestesses do not belong to
this world. They are not physical characteristics; they refer to
invisible bodies. If this myth is treated in a literal way as a
retutn to a lost home, it will become diminished and lose its
force,”’ ;

She was tired and her breathing became more difficult. Nevertheless, her presence dominated the room..

“Here in the southern part of the world, this magic city of
the giants has different names. It has been called the City of
the Caesars, Trapalanda, Paitete, Elelin and Gran Quivira. Some
Spanish conquistadors knew of its existence and came in search
of it rather than to discover material gold.”

She then fell silent. He smoothed her hair and she looked
up to smile at him once more. “You must promise me you'll
look for that city and take me there. Only a few ever enter. It’s
always like that. When someone falls-or loses his way, another
takes his place and continues on surreptitiously, taking on the
mantle of the elect.”

Even though it was late, the man decided to call on his master.
Somehow he believed that the master knew of his conversations
with the hermit and the woman and so was expecting him to
call. Nevertheless, when he arrived he hesitated at the threshold.
Then the door opened and the master stood before him. He
stepped aside to let him enter.

Once inside the master’s study, he saw the book of the Order.
Inside were inscribed all the names of the members of. the
Andean branch. His was there, written in the master’s hand.
Because of the master’s intensity, it was hard to look at him.

54

His eyes were very bright and his features mobile and expressive.
He was of ordinary height and weight, but seemed exceptionally
virtle and sensitive.

“Master,” he began, “I want to consult you about my experiences. It’s been a long time since I’ve been here, and I’m
- anxious to talk to you about them.” -

The master assented, and so the man began by telling him
about the hermit, He also spoke of what his friend had told him
about the Hyperboreans. He described her illness and asked the
master how he could help. For a long time the master remained
silent: he was beyond the state of pity for the human condition.

“Woman diminishes the sacred purpose of our Order. By now
you should have overcome these human affections. Man is dual,
He carries 2 woman inside him. Man’s soul is feminine and
woman's is masculine. An initiate of either sex should not need
the other; each should be capable of fulfilling himself. Perhaps
you've forgotten what the magic wedding means. The only
wedding that counts is with oneself. All the warriors of our
Order function on an exalted level. We are not concerned with
doctrines or legends. Our warfare is on a plane beyond human
feeling; it is a struggle with oneself in order to attain the totality
of being a man-magician, which is quite different from being a
saint. We are not mystics but warriors, and I've already given
you the sign and the sword. They help bring about change and
are universal, functioning on both visible and invisible planes.
You must therefore go into battle; that is all,

“The sign links the universes, joining parallel times; your
personal vibration makes a pact between them. If you'll trace
on your body the last sign I gave you, and concentrate on the
space between your eyebrows, stopping all thought so as to open
the third eye, you'll leave your physical body and be projected
into an outer plane, You'll be taken to the Siddhas of Agharti
and to the City of the Caesars. You must take your sword with
you, however, so as to fight enemy forces that come across your

35

path. You must go into battle so as to put off the approaching
catastrophe. The right numbet of the elect must pass through
the three open doors that face the west.”

He was unable to sleep. He rolled back and forth in his bed
until the light of dawn began to filter through the window.
Then for a while he fell into a light sleep. A young man carrying a flower appeared before him. He was handsome and had a
wide forehead. Approaching the edge of the bed, the young
man placed the flower on the man’s breast and leaned over to
kiss him on the cheek. The room was suffused with childhood
smells, and the man said, “Who are you? I can’t remember
your name.” The youth smiled and said, “I was your childhood
friend. I have grown physically, but I am still a child in spirit.”
Then he disappeared,

After a while, he began to dream of his childhood. He was
climbing over some rocks with a young gitl of his own age
when suddenly she slipped and began to fall, He grabbed her
hand and held on to her as long as he could. But gradually her
hand slipped out of his own. As she began to go she gazed
fixedly at him. Just before their hands parted he saw the intensity of her terror, which seemed to cacompass the whole
world. Her scream hung in the air.

He woke up holding on to the pillow as though it were a
rock. After that he fell into a deep, dreamless sleep and woke
up late in the afternoon.

He dressed swiftly and went out into the street. There he
began to think about his dreams of childhood. Far away in the
country he had once kissed a playmate on the cheek with the
same kiss that had just been returned to him. By now the boy
was probably dead, but he had never forgotten that kiss. As to
the gitl who fell, he often dreamed of her even though nothing
of the kind had ever happened. He wondered whether he was
experiencing an event from some simultaneous or parallel existence. He had the feeling that his life on earth was less real

56

than something taking place somewhere else, even though it had
a certain relationship to his daily existence. He felt that someone
else was directing these events. Still, he thought he recognized
the gitl in the dream. She was a childhood friend with whom
he had run races and climbed over the hills near the city. She
_ was an alter-ego, always with him, protecting him and trying to
win his admitation. Her pale face was framed by thick black
hair and her eyes were like water at night. When she let go of
the rock, her hair floated for a long while over the abyss.

As he walked along, he realized how his ideas of love and
death were always mixed together. He’d never been able to
forget that girl and wondeted what had become of her. Was
she really at the bottom of the chasm? He often thought of her
as his first love, but wondered whether she had really died before he was born. He often thought that he was under the influence of some pre-existent love which made him feel isolated
from his master. The dream of love passed on to him by his
ancestors came from somewhere he could neither identify nor
renounce. Yet it oppressed him all his life. It was like.an idea
struggling to be expressed or an order that had to be obeyed,
like a religion, He wanted to discover the phantoms that controlled his being, since they alone could help him.

Once again he. was in front of his friend’s house. The door
was half open and he had a premonition. He went in quickly
and found her lying on her bed with her nightgown soaked in
blood. She said nothing, and all he could think of was the girl
who had fallen over the cliff. He was still trapped in his dream.

He leaned over her, touching her hair softly as if to dispel
what was happening. He kissed her bloodstained lips and
swallowed some of her blood, tasting tts bitter sweetness.

Then he fetched a towel and a bowl of water and washed her
face and arms. Afterward he changed her gown. At last she
spoke. “I’m afraid last night exhausted me. But I’m not sorry,
because what is happening would have to come about anyhow.
We are now brother and sister. Our agreement has been ful-

37

filled and you have drunk my blood. Now you must give me
some of yours. Long before men loved women, they loved one
another and became blood brothers, Feelings can’t last without
that exchange.” After a pause she resumed: ‘It's strange how
we scem to be like two sleepwalkers going down a road.” She
then told him that she felt her chest was full of blood again and
asked him to give het a bath, since she couldn't do it herself.

He picked her up in his arms. She rested her head on his
shoulder and her hair fell over his chest. He stood her in front
of a looking- glass and took off her gown. She looked at herself
naked and said, ‘‘I can’t love with this body any more, but from
now on Ill need it less and less. Qur love will be fulfilled
through other bodies.”

She stood erect with her shoulders squared. Her neck was
long and her arms hung by her sides. She had long, thin legs,
and the only signs of blood left in her were blotches on her
hands and feet, as though she had been crucified. He picked her
up again in his arms and placed her in the bathtub.

He began to wash her and when he came to her feet he knelt
down. She looked down at him with her faraway eyes and
pointed to her side, just below her breast. A white spot appeared,
like a lance wound,

She touched his head with her hand and said, “Take off your
clothes and get into the bath with me.” He did so and lay down
beside her, holding her hand,

“When T die you will carry me within you. I will be one with
you and live there. A part of you will also die with me and rot
with me in the tomb. Your soul will become me and will have
no face ot body except what I give it. In this way it will become
a person. It will have identity because I’ give you my eternity.
This will be our wedding.”

They lay together as though sealed into oblivion. ,

“Tonight as our destiny is being fulfilled, you must speak to
me of love,” she said. “The flower of love seems to be disappearing. Young people don't seem to care about it, which means

58

that love as a spititual experience will vanish. But we have exchanged blood and become brother and sister. My essence is already moving through your blood, and I'll love you even more
when I’m dead. On earth this happens once and never again.”

“I think I loved in this way once before,” he replied. “There
_ Was a priestess in a temple, or perhaps a woman in a mountain
cave. I wonder if that was you. Did I dream it or is this reincarnation? I wonder if we'll ever meet apain outside of time
and memory....”

“I’ve never existed before,” she answered, ‘and will never
exist again. It’s a matter of once only. We're now at the definitive center of things. When I'm gone, someone who exists in
your blood, some ancestor, will teach you about reincarnation
and what you can obtain from it. What holds the stories together
is the narrator. All that matters is the angel of love. We live
and die for him. We help him understand designs which he
can perceive only as we reveal them to him.”

Dawn was approaching, the morning star just appearing. “We
should pray,” she said. “I'll tell you what to say so that you can
always repeat it when I’m no longer here. When you say it
devotedly I'll appear, like the light of this star.”

Later on he received a letter: “It’s very late, but I can’t sleep.
I'm sliding away, falling tnto space. Don’t let go of me, don’t
let me fall. I put all my faith in you, knowing you'll help me
and not allow me to die completely. You must save me and let
me fall into you instead of the void. You can’t change our
destiny: I must die so that you can live.

~ What would happen if I lived? I’'d be simply one more love
destroyed as the days go by, transformed into indifference. But
with me it will be different. PI never turn into the devouring
mother. The lover's highest destiny is to renounce eternity and
give it to the person he loves. I therefore give you my eternity.
I shall fall into your soul and give it identity. I shall remain
eternally young. And when you die you'll fall into me, join

59

me within. If you fail, everything will have been in vain, and
the angel of love will turn his back on you.

“But now I’m so tired. Come again tomorrow. We have one
more titual to fulfill.” |

Wearing a long white nightgown, barefoot, and with a silver
band in her hair, she stood in the center of the room. Beside
her was a carved wooden figure of a man with wings folded at
his sides. On the couch lay a carved heart, also with wings, made
from the same red wood.

“Lie down on my bed,” she said, ‘‘and let my vibrations
penetrate you. This winged heart is ours. It represents man and
woman together. It knows how to fly to the heavens and how
to return. We shal! go with it and become united in it.”

Lying down with his eyes closed, he felt her hand on his
forehead. Gradually he became drowsy but could still hear
what she was saying. “Love does not relate to two but to four.
One, two, three... First you love with your physical body:
the man you are loving the woman I am, Then the woman inside you, your soul, loves my soul, the man within me. This
love may be externally sterile, but it gives birth to an eternal
son, a being with wings. And so we have four within, and the
fifth is our son, the winged man who is also the son of death.”

As she counted, each time more elaborately, she seemed to
grow in size and become translucent. Her light filled the room.
And then he saw that she was leaning over the bed with a
dagger in her hand. She plunged it into his heart and put the
winged one in tts place.

More and more her eyes reflected the light of another universe. One night she called out. ‘Do you know,” she whispered,
“that when a metal is put into the fire it loses an essential part
of its power? That's why the fire has to be cold, as frozen as
death.” |

Later on he heard a noise in the room as though someone
were opening a door and walking barefoot. She was sitting up

Go

in bed with her arms stretched out, her eyes open unnaturally
wide and staring at a corner of the room.
She had fallen from the rocks.

They lowered the corpse into the grave and he then walked
down the road. Suddenly he thought he heard a voice saying,
“Don’t go away. Don’t leave me alone.” He went back and
stood by the edge of the grave under the midday sun. He felt
a current rising from the ground and slowly entering his body.
It was like a vibration coming upward in waves. For a long
time he stood there without moving or thinking, allowing himself to be taken by that force, until it gradually diminished.
Perhaps she was giving him the spirit of her blood, her Jast
energy. Then he understood that this was the secret wedding
ceremony.

The man spent many years exploring the south, searching for
the enchanted city. Inexorably he was carried farther and
farther south by a current that led to the Pole. He was looking
for the “white island in the sky’ which the Jon people speak of
and which is also mentioned by the Selcnam magicians of Tierra
del Fuego. These strange people believed that this city could be
entered only by an invisible body which they called huaiyuhuen.
_ Only Jon magicians can develop this body. When he reached
the Antarctic, he searched for the oasis of warm water that he
was told existed in the midst of all the ice. This was the Tierra
Verde, or Greenland, of the south. He was also in search of the
White Sun, the cold flame that once existed at the North Pole
but was now at the South.

Then one day he came back. Riding his horse with the white
star on its forchead, he proceeded slowly along the road. He
imagined that his love was with him; she was telling him not
to be discouraged, saying that the city would appear around the
next corner, that he would soon have news of it. Perhaps the
hermit would help.

He was startled: why hadn’t he thought of the hermit? He
quickly returned to the forest and went to the cave where the

GI

old man had been. There were three or four drawings and
paintings on the wall of the cave. He lit a candle and moved
his hands over the surface, looking for a face. He had a strong
feeling there had been one there before. Then as he was about
to leave the cave he tripped over a pile of bones. It was the
skeleton of the Milodon.

Outside, an Araucanian shaman was waiting for him. His
tongue was split and so it was difficult for him to talk. The man
asked about the hermit. ‘““W/hat hermit?’ answered the shaman.
“I've seen you here before, but you were alone, and now you're
here with that woman on the horse. Who is she? At first I
thought you might be Witranalwe. You know, he has a horse
that gets bigger and bigger every time he rides.”

But the man insisted: “Surely you remember. There was 2
hermit. He was a white man and blind.”

“There’s never been a hermit living here,” he answered. ‘‘Perhaps you were talking to yourself or were talking to the ghost
of the Milodon. Or maybe a dwarfish anchimallen has entered
your body. Or possibly you’re the Imbunche, since I notice that
you walk backward with your feet pointed in reverse.”

He left the Indian and once again found himself in the
middle of the forest. Enough light came through the tangled
foliage to nourish the ferns and open the petals of the bellShaped copihue flowers. Around him mafiio, rauli and wild
eucalyptus trees filled the ait with smells strong enough to make
him feel drunk. He got off his horse and sat down on the
ground, In the distance a woodpecker was drilling into a tree.
Before him a fallen tree lay actoss the river. He looked at it,
and after a while he saw a girl coming toward him. She was no
more than eight years old and wore a blue polka dot apron. Her
blond hair stirred in the breeze.

She walked across the old treetrunk and came up to him,
She looked at him in a way which he recognized. “I’ve come to.
meet you from the other side,” she said. ‘You must go in the
opposite direction. Keep looking.”

62

By mid-afternoon the man reached a lake which was enclosed
by steep rocks. A waterfall ran down into it, making a soft
rippling noise. He took off his clothes and entered the water.
The dead woman who was always with him swam at his side.
They approached the waterfall, which was half in the shade.
The water moved in soft green circles, and he felt himself being moved around until he reached the mouth of a cave worn
into the rock. The current directed him inside, where he found
stalactites hanging down from above. He grabbed one of them,
and then, on a wall nearby, he saw a ted copihue. He thought
of it as a sign and didn’t dare touch it. He looked back over
his shoulder for the dead woman, but she wasn’t there. She had
probably gone into the dark part of the cave, he thought, or been
carried by the current to the other side. He swam out and went
toward the waterfall in search of her. He began to fear that she
had drowned in a whirlpool.

Fe climbed onto the shore and dressed. He was still troubled
by doubt, wondering what would have happened if he had allowed himself to be carried into the inner cave by the movement
of the water, asking himself whether at the end of all that
darkness he might not have found a new light—even, perhaps,
the City.

Then one day he came to his old family house. It had once
been the center of enormous landholdings and was centuries
old. There were many underground gallertes held up by halfrotten pillars and containing chains and the bones of prisoners.
Some people believed these tunnels reached to the central square
of the city; they may also have extended to the mountains.

He crossed the old porch and enteted the house, which was
made up of a series of patios linked together by corridors. Some
of the old servants were sitting in broken-down chairs sunning
themselves, They were allowed to stay on because they belonged
to the tradition of the house, like the furniture and the paintings in the rooms.

63

The man announced that he wanted to stay and so he was
given a room on the upper level overlooking one of the old
patios. There was a table with candelabra and an old leatherbound book with moldy clasps. There was also a big wardrobe,
a high-backed chair and a narrow bed with a canopy. On the
wall hung a portrait of one ef his ancestors.

The man threw himself on the bed and remained there
without moving for several days. He stared at the moth-eaten
velvet of the canopy. Sometimes he dozed off. No one came
to see him or brought him food. Sometimes he would dream of
himself lying on a rock, trying to save a girl who was throwing
herself over the edge. He would try to keep calm and look
into the girl’s face in order to discover who she was and how
she felt. After a while he realized that she wasn’t suffering, but
that her face was marked by a smile of complicity. The smile
widened and then changed into a grimace of helpless fury.
Then the face broke into pleces, receded into the distance and
varushed.

Fle got up from the bed, sword in hand, and sat down in
the high-backed chair in front of the portrait of his ancestor.
He tried to remove all thoughts from his mind. Waves seemed
to rise from the floor and fill the room. Before his eyes a cylindrical tube took form and began to rotate. There was an
orange light at one end of the tube, and a tiny figure seemed
to be coming up from inside it. He stopped, the light went
out and the cylinder disappeared. Then suddenly his ancestor
stood before him, dressed in the robes of a priest. He felt a
strange physical sensation through the closeness of his relative.
He recognized himself in the figure’s hands and veins and was
overcome by a feeling of kinship. At the same time he noticed
other traits that came from a foreign country.

The ancestor looked at him carefully and then began to
speak: “Yes, this is the road of tears, which is the more diffcult one. I know it well. God bless you and help you!”

The man then replied, ‘How is it that I can see someone

04

else in you, of even two or three others? Is this proof of reincarnation? I have the feeling that what is happening now has
taken place before in another land and another time. Characters
seem to repeat themselves eternally, and with increasing inten-

“Perhaps we should wait till later to talk of what you call
reincarnation. You know it’s not a proper subject for me.”

“But let me tell you how I came to know about reincarnation,”
the man persisted. ““When I was about four years old I began
to have a sense of my own identity, or ego. I looked at other
people and I said to myself, I-wonder whether they feel their
identities or egos in the same way I do? I’ve been puzzled by
this problem ever since, knowing that I must die. I’ve come
to the conclusion that when I die some other person will take
my identity or ego. This person will represent me. No other
explanation seems possible. If my identity were to perish entitely, no one would ever feel as I do today. I cannot accept
this idea. On the contrary, I believe that feelings and thoughts
have often been repeated and will continue to be so. That ts
what I mean by reincarnation. The identity of the past will
continue into the future. The same I who existed in the past
will come again. I realize I've not explained this very well, but
it is nearly impossible to express this concept.”

“But why can’t individual identity be ended forever?”’ asked
the ancestor. ““To appear once and never again? No one is going
to think and feel exactly as you do. That ego is over and done
with. Each generation brings different beings. But it doesn’t
matter, since the only important thing is blood relationship.
Insofar as you are able to plunge into the river of blood and
perceive its rhythm and melody, you may enjoy a happiness
_ beyond transitory life. You will survive by living within a
family archetype beyond time and space. Awareness of this
blood relationship depends largely on the sensitivity of succeeding generations, This is what reincarnation means. I become reincarnated or survive in you because we are both able

65

to hear this secret melody. Not everyone can do this, and that
is why reincarnation is rare.”’ |

~Do you mean that the dream of eternal love is just a family
melody that we are destined to go on interpreting?”

“Our family, which is centuries old, came hete in search of
a secret element. We received our inheritance from a part of
humanity that doesn’t belong to the earth. You are the last to
come to thts house, but who knows whether your branch will
flourish or not? Still, through you we all live again, loving and
suffering. You are powerful enough to open the tomb and
bring us out into the daylight. But you're not the only one to
have done so. My father, my grandfather and I have all been
caught by the same obsession: we all renounce physical love
for an eternal love realized beyond death. The argument of
our blood has always stressed the possibility of this individual
initiation. Our family’s mission is to revive this possibility, which
in recent years has. lost its attraction, before the end comes and
reduces this old house to dust.”

The ancestor disappeared, and all that remained was the
portrait on the wall, which only partly resembled the man.

He suddenly felt hungry. The door opened and a shadow
came into the room. It was one of the old servants bringing a
tray of food. “I've been ordered to serve you. In the old days
we had seven-course meals, but now everything is different.
Nobody pays me real gold escudos any more. But T stay on be-.
cause I’ve always been here and there’s nowhere else to go."

“That's not true,” answered the man. ‘You know vety well
that we've met in other places. And I don’t want your food. I'm
not physically hungry, but I want you to take me, as you’ve
done before, my faithful friend, right up to the doors of the
City.” |
“Come, then,” replied the old man.

They passed through some long corridors until they reached
a patio with flowers on its walls. The afternoon sun shone on
the iron grilles and on the sagging wooden lintels. The old

66

man stopped and clapped his hands. Just then a number of
women wearing black dresses and dull-colored mantles came
out of the rooms. They began to laugh and clap their hands.
‘“He’s come back again,” they cried out. ““He’s come back to
play with us as he used to do.”

“They're yewulfes,” explained. the old man, ‘Don't you
remember them? I’m also one.’

“What's a yewulfe?’’

“A helper, someone who plays games. Surely you remember.”

They shouted and jumped up and down in the late-af ternoon
light, ‘‘Let’s play,” one of them cried out. ‘“Let’s bind his eyes.”

They grabbed him and wrapped a cloth around his head.
Then they turned him around in circles, Janghing all the time.

He begged them to take the bandage off, but they insisted
he tell them what he was looking for.

“Where is she? Where have you hidden her?”

Then they took the bandage off and made him enter one of
the rooms where another group of women sat next to a fre.
They had wooden masks on thetr faces and were weaving
small rugs.

“We're weaving a wedding dress for your bride,” said one
of them. “But what we're really weaving is your soul. The soul
doesn’t exist by itself, but must be woven, in the form of a
small rug. How would you like yours made? Choose the colors.”

Another woman showed him a huge pair of scissors. “These
_ are to cut the cord of life. I have cut hers.” She laughed
behind her mask.

Just then he impulsively snatched away her mask. The face
revealed was that of the girl falling into the void. It broke into
pieces and left behind a faceless body, a black bulk.

The ancestor then returned. “You were wrong to visit the
rest of the house without my permission. Don’t you know what
this house is? It’s your own body, and now you're living here.”
He reached out his gnarled finger and touched the younger man's
stomach.

67

“You should go down to the cellar before you visit the
towers, although in a sense there is neither an upstairs nor a
downstairs. You can come and go from either, But whatever we
do, we must first visit the Original Ancestor and teceive his
blessing.”. 3 |

“No,” answered the man, ‘I’m only interested in her. Tell
me where I can find her. Somehow I’ve lost her ghost.”

“She's now undergoing a second death, called the interim
mori. As she dies a second time, her astral body begins to disintegrate. You wouldn't recognize her if you saw her now.
That's why she carries a mask: she doesn’t want to frighten
you.”

“This is like the Tibetan’ Book of the Dead,” said the man.
“You go from one state of decomposition to another.”

“Don’t talk to me about books,” answered the ancestor. “I’ve
also written some.’’ He indicated one lying on the table. It
was called Nat#ral Right. The ancestor picked it up and began
to flick through its pages and to read. ‘True love never survives
the act of fulfillment; rather it is a secret agreement that takes
place on another plane. True union occurs Only in dreams.”

He paused to explain that his book dealt with an inspired
science. ‘‘Love,’’ he continued reading, “has nothing to do with
sexuality; it comes before it. Lave even existed before species
were divided into two sexes. There are primary organisms and
hermaphroditic ones which reproduce themselves by parthenogenesis. But they look for another hermaphrodite to love, makin 2
a parody of partition before it actually happens. Love produces
the partition of the hermaphrodite and the differentiation of
the sexes. Love creates sex, not the other way around. The hermaphrodite was divided so that he would have a motivation for
existence, searching through the world fot a reunion, or for
transformation into a new androgynous being. This is a being
quite different from a primeval hermaphrodite. The new being
is neither a natural son nor a supernatural angel, but has some
of the qualities of each,”’

68

The ancestor stopped reading and spoke directly to the man.
“When you find your lover and join her forever, when you
| matty het, you'll know what I mean. Books can’t explain

’ He leafed through the last pages without reading any.
Chavis the book open, he put it down on the table and walked
out of the room.

Stifly, as though he were jeavtiip his own body, the man got
up from the chair and went over to the table. He lit a candle
and looked down at the open pages. Written there in an archaic
handwriting was the title Sviras—Aphorisms. He began to read:

O Goddess, you are the real me. There’s no difference between
you and me,

The wind which blows from the garden where my lover sits
brings ber essence to me.

You should think of the sord as a castle made of diamonds or
of very clear crystal, with many rooms and dwelling places,
some above and some below, and others on the sides. In the
center 15 the most imtportant one where the mosi secret dialogue
takes place between the lover and the soul.

Toes castle ts planted in the living waters of life.

Now we must learn how to enter it. Perhaps you ihink Pm
talking nonsense since I’ve already said that the castle is the
soul, But there are great distances between states of being. There
are many souls on the outskirts of the castle, some wanting to
come in and others wishing to remain ontside. Many don't even
know such a beautiful place exists.

You don't have to go back and forth
if you're looking for me.

Just look inside yourself:

I lrve there now.

I gave myself io bim
and then I changed.
‘Now Iam my beloved,
and my beloved is me.

.. they are like omens and messengers of the approaching
dark night of ibe soul, even though they are transient, like this
wating nighi.... But Doubt is what the soul calls the Dark
Night... this Dark Knight of loving fie: as it becomes a
purge, so the soul zs set on fire.... :

Bitter wind,

Stay away.

Don’t touch the wall

where my wife is sleeping.

There were other sections of the book, many with titles and
subtitles: |

UNDER THE LAST RULE OF THINGS
DEATH

The warrior must give bis lover's face to death, In this way
death becames feminized.

THE KISS

The kiss was a new ritual established to replace the knife
cut and the sucking of blood. It also involves the mixing of
breaths. But just as the white god Quetzalcoatl failed when be
wied to replace the bloody sacrifices of the Aztecs by floral
offerings, so the kiss never achieved what was intended of it.
It became a mere sensual act. The true kiss ts the first step on
a road leading to the lost home and the City of Eternal Life.

THE LOOK

Eestasy expresses the unton of virility and femininity within
man. The look transmits this ecstasy to the heart.

He turned additional pages of the book until he came to this:

FAMILY WINE

In the Fifth Book of Weindenfeld, which we alone know,
the creation of the spirit of wine is explained. It has never been
described in another book. It is Spiritus mercurit universalis—or

7O

the menstruation of the grape, the ultimate dissolving of liquid.
Our family believes that liquid gold cannot be created unless
the spirit of wine is first obtained. The formula for this is to
take equal portions of red and white wine and heat them at a
steady temperature, The wine should boil until a thin layer of
oil appears. This is putrefaction or vegetal menstruation. During
the time it takes for this oil io rise to the surface, those in attendance must pray. Then when the bowl is uncovered, the
participants inhale the avoma. If it is subtly penetrating, it means
that the spirit of wine has appeared. The spivit must be drunk
fast before it condenses, Once this is done, the vas hermeticum
#5 closed and kept boiling until the remaining oil is transformed
into metal, into the liquid gold that represents the quintessential
fifth element. This material is not found in nature and bas to
be artificially mannfacinred.

Two roads may be followed, one leading quickly to its destination because it does not require the distillation of the spirit of
wine nor the help of a womian, a soror mastica, in the laboratory.
It bas been called the dry road. Whether its results ave the same
as those of the other, who can say? But our family bas always
chosen the road that niakes use of wine. It is called the liguid
voad and requires a woman’s company. She produces the spirit
of wine and gives it to us. Nevertheless, this is no companionable journey, for the vest of the voyage is terribly lonely. You
will be more alone than the man on the dry road and will face
many dangers. That is why we think this road the most noble
and complete. We're not allowed to write down the name of
the first of us who chose it, but in our family we always ratse
a glass to him.

Then followed several illegible rhymes and others that had
been crossed out with ink. It was impossible to decipher them.
The man then turned to the last page but one, and this is what
he read:

I tell you my heart was opened up as though by a knife, and

you entered it, Then it closed and was sealed. You will therefore have no otber companion until the day of resurrection and

yi

last judgment. you will share my life and my death as well,
When I dte, you will remain in my heart in the gloomy depths
of the prave.

Once again the ancestor appeared..He was carrying a candelabrum and was dressed in an elaborate robe, “Come with me,”’
he said. “I want to show you our vineyards and wine cellars
where we've made wine for seven hundred years. This has
always been our family business.”’

They left the empty house and went out to the fields, where
the workers were gathering bunches of grapes in hampers and
pressing them with their bare feet. They sang old songs as the
new wine was made. In a tent the members of the family had
gathered to take part in the harvest festival. Old and young sat
in total silence and concentration, When the ancestor arrived,
they stood up and bowed, one by one. They looked at the man
with surprise, not recognizing him..

‘Don’t worry,” said the ancestor, ‘most of them don’t know
what this is all about.’ He turned away and said, “Now let's
go to the wine cellars,”

Once again they were alone. The ancestor went on ahead,
showing him the barrels, each with a name inscribed on it.
Toward the back the barrels became smaller. “The best wine
is kept for the family,” he said. “Here we also keep the spirit
of wine. You’ve probably read how it’s made, in the book I
left in your room. The Fifth Book of Weindenfeld is our family
property and no one besides us knows that he wrote it.”

They were near the end of the upper level and the ancestor
paused at an unmarked barrel. ‘This one doesn't -have a2 name
yet, but Pil put yours on it when I know what your real name
is,

By now they had reached the entrance to the underground
vault, but before going down, the ancestor changed his clothes
and picked up a sword. “You must take a sword too,” he said. |
“You'll need it.”

72

The ancient wooden pillars were held together with leather
straps. The floor was uneven, the air moist and heavy. From time
to time in the glow of the candle they could see a few rusty
links of broken chain. “We're now going to visit the Great
Ancestor,” he said. :

For a Jong time they walked on in darkness, and the man
asked his ancestor how he found his way. ‘I don’t know where
we are,” he answered. “I simply keep walking. No one has ever
been through all of these passages.”

Just then they heard a moan followed by something like a
roar. The man felt a sudden chill, but his ancestor calmed him
by taking his arm. “I felt the same thing when I first came
down here,” he said. “Just hold on tight to your sword.”

Snostly afterward they stopped: it appeared that they had
reached the end, In front of them was a stone column. At its
base they saw in the candlelight a deformed human being tied
with chains and straps. His face was marked by humiliation and
suffering, but these scourges also revealed the sanctity of mankind. The face represented the features of creatures everywhere,
whether animal, fish, vegetable or mineral.

“Here is the Great Ancestor, the great-grandfather of all
grandfathers. Ask him for his blessing and forgiveness. Kneel
down before him and kiss his sores.”

“Never,” the man replied. “But I will free him, That's why
I came here.”

With a simple blow of his sword he cut the chains and straps
that had bound the Great Ancestor, the king who had ruled
over all the slaves of Atlantis.

He came into the room. He still bore the marks of the tortures and chains and had a peculiar smell. ‘I’ve come to thank
you,’’ he said. “And I'll express my gratitude to you in the same
way, by cutting your chains and freeing you from the links that
have held you to a dream. Here’s the genealogical tree of the
family. One of your great-grandfathers was named Sunday. An-

73

other Saturday. Your name ts Friday, since Friday is the day of
yout star. A new branch is slowly growing at the top of the tree.
It will be the last because it is sterile.’

The man began to thank the Great Ancestor, but was quickly —
interrupted. ‘Don't thank me,’’ he said, “This family is cursed —
by a limitless pride which seeks shelter in iHusion. Your ancestor in the portrait and your other great-grandfathers were all
incapable of loving people of flesh and blood. ‘They all devoted
themselves to something that did not exist, hoping thereby
to save their pride. You're the same. You're unable to love a
real woman and so love a dead one instead. You know she
doesn’t exist because she’s gone forever. Like the rest of your
ancestors, you love no one except yourself,”’

He felt a Jance enter his side. Unable to move or answer,
he closed his eyes. Then with great difficulty he moved his
stone lips: “Why hast thou forsaken me?”’

“I loved her with all my being and strength. It’s true I loved
her in a different way, but it was more than ordinary love. I've
taken her through the world, giving her my eyes so she might
see, my senses so she might fecl. If I can’t love anyone else, it’s
because she has made me burn and left me cold, because she and
I are one.”

He then began to pray to the morning star. In a. few minutes
he heard a voice: '‘No, not yet. I am still in the grave.”

After a while the ancestor spoke. “This is Nigredo, the Dark
Night of the Soul. The corruption of one is the purification of
another. Corruptio unius generatio est alterium.”

After Nigredo comes Albedo. This is Albania, the white
land, the ascent to miraculous heights and a final meeting in the
oasis sutrounded by ice. Perhaps she will also appear, to help |
guide him along the difficult path, until at last they reach the
gate of the City, which she does not enter.

The man went over to the mirror and Icoked at himself. He
discovered that his eyes were hers. He was looking at himself
from within her.

74

“You and I are one,’”’ he exclaimed.

This cry of triumph brought about the earthquake. As the
mountains trembled along the southern coast, the Jand of the
androgynous Elella emerged from beneath the ocean.

7)