## The Himalayas

"Master, I have remembered something

from the future. I’ve seen myself wearing strange clothes and
ornaments. I was preparing to fight in a war I knew nothing
about. It was in a place which didn’t belong to our time at
all.’”.

— “What will come will come,"’ the master replied, “and be no
better than now.”

“Master, this memory of the future has made me come to
you here in the forest of Bundelkhand. I know you've lived here
for a long time, and I therefore beg you to teach me the doctrine
and practice of Tantric Kaula. You are the greatest master of all;
you are Matsyendranatha.”

The guru, who was completely naked, his body covered with
blue ashes, closed his eyes and remained silent for a long time.
His right arm rested on a short wooden brace, and he sat in the
lotus position shaded by an old fig tree. At length he opened
his eyes, as though he were returning from a trip underground,
He gazed steadily at the young man and stared into his eyes.
The youth felt as though he was being opened up and examined
in a most intimate way, leaving nothing untouched from his
childhood to the present day. After a while, finding the experience too much, he lowered his eyes in fear and shyness.

“When you speak of your memory of the future, you're probably thinking of transmigration or reincarnation. Maybe you

4

think I can help you fulfill your destiny. But the idea of reincarnation isn’t mentioned anywhere in the old texts. Rather it
emerged from the detritus of the Flood and is linked to the
primeval serpent and to the dark people of prehistoric times.’’

He then looked directly at the young man. “What else did
you see while you were dreaming?”

“I saw myself getting ready to fight in a war,’ he answered.
“T was carrying a sword,”

“The sword represents knowledge. But before I can accept
you as a disciple and begin to initiate you into the practice of
Kaula, you must bring me a gift. What I require is the milk of
a woman, mother’s milk. We must begin all over again as if we
were children.”

Where would he find mother’s milk? He would have to go to
the entrance of the temple which was guarded by a statue of the
god Ganesh, half elephant, half man, the son of Siva and ~
Parvati. He'd have to bow down and ask that clephantine god
for his help. The young man was wondering haw to do this
when he saw a priestess from the temple carrying flowers to
place at the feet of the god. She was beautiful and smelled of
sweet perfume. Her black hair was gathered under a garland
of jasmine flowers.

“Don’t go away,” he said.

Her eyes were large and deep.

“I must have mother’s milk.”

“Fm not a mother and am not allowed to be one,” she answered. “I’m a virgin. Still, give me your bowl.”

The young man handed her the bowl, his eyes lowered.

“No, you must help me,” she said. She made him stand up
and took one of his hands in her own, and the young man saw
there was a small white spot between two of her fingers. Leprosy,
he thought. She uncovered her breast. ‘You must squeeze here,”
she said. But his hand trembled and he didn’t know how, She
showed him, and the virgin milk came out.

“Ganesh is giving you this milk,” she said.

4

The young man tried to kneel down before the psestess, but
she stopped him. Then she joined her hands together and said,
“OM.”

The young man was pleased but alse a little sad, without
knowing quite why. |

Crossing the wide terrace enclosed by a gallery, he heard the
sounds made by builders and sculptors cutting stone for the temple. The granite and marble shook with their blows and the
air was full of dust. Alone under a marble gateway, a blind
sculptor sat with a block of stone between his legs. He sensed
the young man walking by with the bowl in his hands and, ptetending he could see, he turned the blind sockets of his eyes to
follow the youth as he walked toward the forest,

The master raised the bow] to his lips and drank, keeping his
eyes closed in meditation. ‘“You must also drink,” he said, turning to the young man. “What is left is yours.”

The young man sipped the milk nervously. It tasted of jasmine,
and he could not help thinking about the priestess. Something of
herself had become a patt of him, and of the master as well,
forming a bond among them. Surely he was now ready to be
initiated..

“No,” said the master, “'‘you’re not yet ready. I must first
have your yantra.”’

“Master, who can draw my yantra?”’

The master told him to visit Sudhir Ranjau Bhaduri and ask
him to perform the task and reveal his inner nature. The young
man therefore went to see him, thinking that he had heard the
name before. Perhaps it was another memory from the future.
He found Sudhir Ranjau Bhaduri seated inside his hut with a
young boy who passed him his brushes, rinsing them beforehand in a brass bowl.

“T shouldn't do this,”’ said the old man. “I ought to do your
horoscope instead. The yantra is a secret inner portrait upon
which your outer appearance is based. In order to describe your
yantra, I must discover your inner vibrations and give them

colors. Then I must guess where the centers are that produce
these vibrations. They represent your inner power and dictate
the design of your yantra. They are like a set of musical instruments, tambourines and zithers which your master calls chakras,
or lotus wheels.... But there is something absurd in my drawing your yantra, since you are trying to change it. I don't know
whether what you are doing is natural or not, but if you succeed,
you will be immortal. I will be your witness, if not now, in the
future, in three hundred yeats or so.”

The yantra was beautiful, painted in pale and somewhat indistinct colors, as though the old man knew that the music it gave
forth would be soft but captivating.

The master also seemed to hear this music, for a strange expression came into his eyes when the young man feturned to
the forest. He became immediately engrossed in the yantta,
reading it with great care and skill.

“No one knows who created the world, not even Brahma.
Something must have upset the balance of forces for the world
to be born. Perhaps it was the feminine principle, or wife, that
did it. Nevertheless, despite our ignorance of the world’s origins,
we know at least of some beings who in ancient times tried to
control the laws of fate by developing a countervailing set of
laws. These strange people were called Siddhas, and they developed their secret knowledge in two cities of the Himalayas
called Agharti and Champula. Anyone wishing to apptoach these
cities had to walk backward, to signify his return to the point
of origin.

“Although not even God knows who created the world, the
Siddhas may have discovered the secret that is hidden in the
sexual power of the female and may have made use of it.”

The master continued his instructions to the young man:
“As I sit under this tree I must tell you that what I am trying
to say comes from a great distance. It was transmitted by the

6

serpent who survived the great Flood that destroyed the race of
god-men for whom woman was not something outside but
within, for whom male and female were one and not alien to
each other. But then ‘she’ did something ‘he’ didn’t know about,
and the waters destroyed the land where the king was supreme
priest. With horns on his head,’ sitting beneath a tree and
surtounded by four emblematic animals, he meditated and
directed the course of the stars. You must follow his example.
Unless you feincorporate woman within you and sit by the roots
of the tree surrounded by your animals, you will accomplish
nothing. You'll only be a leaf blown by the wind.”

After he spoke, the master thought it necessary to rise. He did
so with the greatest difficulty. Having sat so long underneath
the fig tree in the lotus position, his legs and fect had become
mingled with the roots of the tree. Few understand the sacrifice
a master imposes on himself when he accepts a disciple.

At daybreak the forest came to life, sending vibrations actoss
the silent river to the temple roofs. The master led his disciple
to the royal stables of Khajuraho, When they arrived, the stable
boys prostrated themselves before them. They then ran away
because no one had ever before seen Matsyendranatha in person.

A black mare with a white star on her forehead was standing
in the stables. A powerful stallion came in and with great
delicacy rubbed his nose against her feet and haunches. He then
moved away and uttered a rich neigh as though he were master
of the universe. The mate gazed at the stallion and the atmosphere grew tense and heavy, like the sky before the monsoon.
The drama went on until, like a crack of thunder, the stallion
leaped. And then an extraordinary thing happened: like a prehistoric god, the stallion lay stretched out along the mare’s back.
He was like a tattered doll with big yellow teeth, while the mare
stood powerful and cunning, only slightly lowering her ears.

“Do you understand what has happened?”’ asked the master.

The disciple was too disturbed to answer.

Later, under the fig tree, the master explained. “AJI that has
to be changed. The stallion must be turned into a mare, man
into a woman, There is no other way. You remember how full
of joy the mare was, anticipating her strength even before anything happened? And then afterward it was she who was
triumphant. This ts the story of the race. Woman came from
man, but once the two sexes became independent, it was inevitable that one would devour the other. That is what the
universe is: someone gives and someone receives. There is always a sacrificial victim. Many people believe that the only way
to avoid this cycle is asceticism and chastity. But this never
works, for in one way or another the individual is devoured.
Always the man’s role is secondary. The mare devours the
stallion who has impregnated her, the bee kills the drones, the
ptimeval mother carries around her neck the primordial Lingam.
Every mother, mare, goddess and woman is a devouress, and in
one form or other every male is castrated and consumed.” He
paused. “To change all this we must redirect the tremendous
enetgy that you saw in the stallion. We must restore the original
principle of male passivity and female activity. The world was
created not by the masculine principle but by the feminine. Love
must learn to follow this course. Only those willing to learn
how to love women in a different way, murdering them outwardly in order to permit an inner rebirth, will find the immortal city of Agharti.

“The key moment is when the semen is ejaculated. When the
stallion ejaculates, he becomes impoverished. The role of the
male appears to end while the female’s begins. But semen is
also soma and should be conserved. It should not spurt outward
but inward. Outwardly it can only create children of the flesh,
while inwardly it makes sons of the spirit. Qutwardly it plays
the mother’s game; inwardly the male is impregnated and engenders the son of man.

“No sons. of the flesh are born in this loveless love. There
are only sons of the spirit, escaping cyclical life, who are created
when the semen is driven inward, giving them eternal life.”

8

In his doorway the blind sculptor tapped the stone caressingly.
After a while he stopped, as though he were trying to listen to
an echo within himself. Just then one of the priestesses of the
temple placed flowers at the feet of the elephant god, Ganesh.

Meanwhile the master continued his discourse. “Semen is a
visible aspect of the great power of which we are all a part. It
is OM made into substance. It is the movement of the sun
within your blood and of the sea of life within your body. It is
also the word you use to communicate with the gods. You must
therefore preserve it if you wish to enter Agharti.”

The disciple said that he had seen statues of Siva and Parvati
making love on the walls of the temple but he did not understand how the semen was to be withheld.

‘You must discover this for yourself. You must transform a
natural act into a ritual, changing it into something supernatural.
Ordinary sexual life does not create magicians or Siddhas; it
merely perpetuates the human race. You will therefore have to
follow a different road, also in the company of a woman so
that you will both be saved. If she is not with you, something
will be left unfulfilled and incomplete, You will have attained
nothing. Even at the ends of their lives, saints and ascetics continue to yearn for women. The technique you must follow is
therefore not something you learn but something you must grow
to understand. At the moment of ecstasy Siva remains motionJess; he does not ejaculate his semen. She, Parvati, is the active
one, for when woman does not receive, she gives. From her
skin the woman transmits a substance which enters the
man's blood and becomes a part of him. It creates a unity
within him. The seed is planted, and he enters the city
of Siddhas. Pure sexuality echoes a desire to return to the ancestral home. It is a return to unity: true sex is the nostalgia
of the gods.

“You are carried beyond the realm of ordinaty cxistence. The
life of a Kaula magician goes against nature: it proceeds in the
opposite direction.”

The master then spoke of visiting the temple, but did not
move from the shade of the fig tree. He explained that the temple was like the body of a man, and that as you go over the
face of the earth, visiting sanctuaries from Mount Kailas in the
Himalayas to Cape Comorin in the far south, you find that they
are all the same. The gods live in all of them, and you can make
offerings to them wherever you are. The sacred river flows
through the human body, and the true Kailas is found within.
Even the sky has the shape of a human body, and the stars
reflect the centers of light that exist inside human beings. Those
who travel externally to these heavenly bodics will only find
empty planets. The real cosmic universe is an interior one. Every
man should therefore accept the idea that he is also a temple. He
must enter the labyrinth in order to find the central palace and
throne of Parvati. It is necessary to go underground to discover
this secret world and find the keys to this hidden continent.
This is the only way to revive the ancient energy of the previous race of pod-men. These submetged giants are thirsting
for their resurrection, They control the course of the stars and
the impulses of the human body, but no one is in touch with
them. It is therefore essential to return to this lost land of
the giants. The bridge that links the present with the past offers
a clue to a real understanding of existence.

The master then spoke of the lotus flowers and of chakras.
These exist even though they cannot be felt. They are invisible
flowers symbolizing the possibility of the soul, The soul itself
has a body called the Linga-sarira, but it must be created. A
person is like a garden in the dark. There must be light in
order to see the flowers. The light, called Kundalini, illumines
the narrow passages that lead from one flower, one chakra, to
another.

All this may seem unreal, but it is more real than what actually exists. Immortality is a flower which no one has ever
seen. If it didn’t exist, it would have to be invented.

IQ

The master then described the different chakras or lotus
flowers tu the human bedy, giving them their ancient names.
He spoke of their color and the number of petals each one had,
starting with the flower of the genitals at the base of the spine,
and continuing up through the stomach, the heart, the throat
and the space between the eyes until finally reaching the last,
which is outside the head, like a halo, representing the place
where Siva met Parvati. It is beyond the human body and can
be reached only by crossing a diamond-studded lake in a submarine vessel guided by a blind sailor. This voyage is necessary
to find the emptiness which may be inside or out. Between the
eyebrows there is a flower with two petals like the wings of a
dove. When this flower blossoms, the third eye opens and the
gates of the city of Aghasti come into view.

The master also spoke of other flowers, forbidden ones, which
exist in other parts of the body, on the feet and at the knees,
that generally don’t open. These were other centers of consciousness representing the thoughts of the ancient god-men. A Kaula
magician might open them, but without remaining too long in
any of them.

Speaking always in a symbolic language and making analogies
between what was within and without, the master then described the channels that link the various chakras. He said they
were called nadis, and that they were filaments of the soul that
carried the terrible energy of the ancient giants. He spoke of
the force called Kundalint which sleeps like a serpent at the base
of the tree. Kundalini represents a potential power capable of
destroying the world of illusion in order to attain a higher level
of reality. It has to be waked, created or invented. ‘Together,
the male and female are capable of arousing the sleeping Kundalini and letting it express itself. Both powers are necessary,
walking hand in hand on the summit. But the final leap must
be made alone.

Evety part of this journey could be repeated in some other
form, but only in appearance. Moreover, the challenge of the
Jeap produces a profound doubt. This trip is not a linear journey

It

but is citcuitous within each flower or chakra. The gardener
stops, rests and eventually sleeps at the root of the tree in a dark
cavetn. Refreshed, he resumes his journey. Many times he falls
back, only to rise once more so as to gain a sense of his own
being, profiting from an alternation of movements backward
and forward. In this process, he invents his own identity; he
becomes his own father and son, which means that he is at once
father and son.

A child is born. He is so frail and delicate a gust of wind or
an evil thought could destroy him. The child of a man impregnated by woman, he is Linga-sarira, an astral body or invisible product of the mind. He becomes sublimated and transfigured when, through the magic alchemy of the Siddhas, a
stream of semen penetrates the father’s interior.

Some believe the woman is not needed, that this procedure is
mental. Others assert it is only symbolic, involving the soul but
not the body. But the Kaula practitioners are physical. When
the feminine soul of the man marties the masculine soul of the
woman, the body becomes the instrument of their union which
must be tuned and played upon. This is especially true in this
iron age when the physical body seems to control decisions, But
the physical and spiritual must go together; each is necessary
for the other.

For a long time the disciple obeyed his master’s instructions.
He practiced the rituals he had been taught and tried to purify
the passages through which the magic fluids were to pass. He
learned how to swallow a long strip of linen and to eject it
from his rectum. He discovered how to take in water through
his penis so as to prepare for the reabsorption of semen during
the magic ritual. Finally he concentrated on the point between
the eyes and learned how to stop thinking and breathing.

One day he returned to the statue of Ganesh at the doorway
of the temple and bowed down to touch his forehead to the
stone pavement. When he looked up, he saw once again the

2

priestess standing before him, smelling of fresh flowers and
rich perfumes. )

“Why do you look so sad?” she asked.

“What else can I be,” he answered, “when despite my efforts
to get rid of feelings I still have them?”

“Who is your guru?” she inquired.

‘“Matsyendtanatha.”’

She then asked whether he received lessons on a mystical
plane, since no one had ever seen his teacher in person.

The disciple replied that, on the contrary, Matsyendranatha
lived in the woods of Bundelkhand and that he sat beneath a
fig tree. When the priestess seerned doubtful, he offered to take
her to him so that she could see for herself. They walked together through the city and entered the forest. And then gradually the disciple, who had been so confident, bepan to hesitate.
It took him some time to find the road and the fig tree he knew
so well. Once they arrived, he had to admit there was no sign
of the master.

“You see,” said the priestess, “I was right after all. Your
Matsyendtanatha doesn’t exist. It makes me wonder whether
you ve learned the true doctrine after all. Maybe you've been
deceived by your imagination.”

The disciple answered that perhaps Matsyendranatha wanted
to hide and had therefore made himself invisible or turned himself into a tree.

“Tt doesn’t matter,” said the priestess. ‘‘I will show you the
possibilities of your own body.”

The young man was unprepared for this and told her that his
master would not approve.

“You mustn't worry,” she said. ‘“Your body is a temple.”

When they returned, she placed a jasmine wreath at the feet
of Ganesh and began to lead the disciple toward the dark, cool
interior of the temple. Before entering, however, she paused
and decided to show him the outside of the temple. All about
were catved the aspects of Maya or illusion. On the lower Levels
bas-relief figures fought, wounded one another, took pleasure

¥

T3

and loved. Each of the eighty-four positions of love-making were
reproduced. But the lovers carved on the walls were not men
but gods. The distant look on the faces of the male figures was
not human. Moreover, the love-making posttions were never
spontaneous or natural: each was part of a ritual. The women
helping the central couple received no pleasure from the caresses
they gave and received. Rather they were like the minor accompanying insituments in a piece of music. They kept the tempo
or thythm but remained in the background. It was a world of
barren love which in the harsh sunlight echoed the stone wall
of human existence. It was at once Maya and the steep rock
face of Mount Kailas, upon which each configuration represented a god making love. It also. reproduced the body of a man.

The disciple recognized the temple from his master’s earlier
description of it. It was built from a single piece of rock, like
Stva’s mountain. Before they went inside, the priestess asked
him to look carefully at the statues already made by the Khajutaho scufptors. She wanted him to see how the sculptors had
recorded the mystery of the gods. They represented a mixture
of the divine with the demoniacal, and the tension between them
carries the message of this extraordinary art. It comes from a
mysterious and illicit zone whose effect is reproduced on the
faces of the couple. Like stone leaves on a cosmic tree, their
bodies are agitated by an alien wind. Ordinary people will never
understand their meaning. They will look for pious explanations
to shake off the frightening vision these statues represent: but
they will not succeed. This vision has its own vitality and comes
from another universe. It is indestructible. Siva’s face at the
moment of ecstatic coitus expresses pleasure and sadness, piety,
isolation, tenderness and withdrawal, all at the same time. With
one hand he delicately supports his lover, protecting her, while
with the other he traces a ritual gesture which passes on his
message from one generation to another. The interlaced bodies
of these stone figutes present a vision that will expire only with
the end of the human race. The spirit which built this temple
corresponds to a moment of divine decadence. Only gods

14

enamored of human beings could favor this art. The sculptors
who carved these figutes must have been mediums, blind vehicles for their message. Perhaps these sculptors were sleepwalkers who carved while they were away from their cells at
night. |

All of the temples at Khajuraho run from north to south,
except the temple of Siva, the Chonsant Jogini, which goes
from east to west, suggesting something special. Moreover it is
carved from a single block of dark granite, whereas the other
temples are built of tan or red stone blocks. The Chonsant
Jogini forms a mandala that is difficult to penetrate, and its doorway is guarded by the statue of Ganesh. In most Hindu temples
the worshipper is enveloped by the structure and can leave only
by the main entrance. At Khajuraho, however, the innermost
rooms of the temples have three smal! passages that lead to the
outside. In the temple of Stva these doors open to the west.

She took him by the hand as they entered, “You are now
walking inside your own body,” she said, “looking for the
entrances and exits of the mandala, which ts a maze containing
all your flowers. We're now in the first room and must walk
across it, making a prayer at each step. Say ‘OM.’”

They moved in, and the air was heavy with sandalwood
smoke. On both sides were lateral cells with double doors. The
priestess pointed to one of them: ‘“T'his is where I sleep,” she
said. “I also prepare myself here, and offer sacrifices.”

Then they entered the sanctum sanctorum known as the
gabhagriha, It was like the crater of a volcano. The young man
was overcome by a whirlwind of feelings and threw himself
onto the floor, repeating mantrams, one after another. From the
center of the floor, which represents the yoni or sexual organ of
the primordial wife, rose the erect stone Lingam, symbolizing
the phallus of Siva. The two were united there, creating the
androgynous Siva Ardhanasisvara, The granite column was
polished by the priestesses, who washed it with sacred oils and

r5

animal blood tepresenting the menstrual flow of the wife. A
brass horn sounded from time to time. The three doors on the
rear wall were closed.

Then from somewhere within the temple a door opened and
the blind sculptor came out. He approached the Lingam and sat
down beside it with his legs crossed. The priestess stepped forward and began a series of ritual movements, avoiding certain
positions and searching for others with intense concentration,
as though the air around her were a structure whose entrance
she was trying to find. When she approached the Lingam she
poured scented oi] over it and then turned, to the disciple and
told him to do the same. He stood up as though he were in a
dream, She gave him the oil and he poured it over the granite
Lingam and yoni, The three then Jay down in the same position
beside the dark column in the center of the room. She then got
up again and gave the blind sculptor a basin of water. “I am the
river,” she said, “whereas you are both the stone in the middle
of the rrver and the man who carves it. You foretell the future.”’

The blind sculptor rose and poured the consecrated water
over the disciple’s head. ‘You are a fish in the river,’’ he said,
“and you must move to the west.”

The priestess spoke again. “Even before the first stone was
carved,” she said, “the temple was already here. It's always
been here. All that happened is that it became visible. Within
the temple walls the demiurge gazes at herself in the mirror.
You ll find her absorbed in herself and admiring her vanishing
beauty. You must learn all these things, and many more as well,
for soon you will have to pass through those three doors toward
something else.”

Once again the blind sculptor approached them. He ran his
fingers over the faces of the priestess and the disciple. He did
so slowly in order to record them in the memory of his hands.

The disciple returned to the forest and sat down under the
fig tree. No one was there, and he knew the master would

16

never return. He stayed there for many years. He subjected
himself to the most difficult disciplines intended to purify the
body and discovered many new ways to do so. Sometimes he
believed the Siddhas were guiding him away from the city of
Agharti and he felt that he was caught up in a battle between
opposed forces. Then for a time it would seem to him that the
earth was feminine. In dreams he would see twisted rocks trying to take on animal forms, attempting to cry out in words
their desire for the warmth of animal life. He would call out
to them in his dream, urging them to hurry up so that in turn
their animal brothers could become men.

Then a god with horns and crooked feet ‘appeared, playing
a flute. He began to dance and sing: ““The vineyard is blue, the
wine is red, the blood of the dancers is hot. Come and join us
in the forest of Vrindavan!”

The disciple would then close his eyes and pray that he
might be relieved of this burning passion.

Through the years he encountered the whole pantheon of
the gods, and he sang and prayed to them all as he prepared
himself, almost unconsciously, for the ritual that was to come.

Gradually the disciple became convinced that the priestess of
the temple had died. By this time he had discovered the technique of looking and seeing; that is, he had learned the difference between the two, how to really see a flower, a tree, an
animal or even a thought. To do this, he had to block all ideas
and feelings out of his mind, so that he might see what could
be revealed by an impersonal beam of light. His world became
transformed as he began to hear the language of animals and
rocks and to distinguish between various colors of light. He
grew to understand that everything has a soul of its own and an
Independent exterior vitality.

To reach this stage, he first had to learn about his own body
and become acquainted with the instrument which allowed him
to see and hear. One day when he awoke from one of his

17

dreams, he asked himself whether he would see and hear if
he had no eyes or ears. To find out, he covered up his exterior
body from head to toe. He then began to examine himself
from within, looking at his heart, his lungs, his veins. Gradually he moved up the tree of his spinal column until he reached |
his skull. Then he opened his eyes and saw the world for the
first time.

He used the same technique to look inside, to calm his body
and look at himself as though he were a stranger. When he
teached the top of the tree, he did not open his ordinary eyes
but the third eye between the eyebrows. It was an act of unfolding. The petals opened, and the bird resting there spread
its Wings.

Deeply concentrating on this spot between his eyes, he stopped
all thoughts and blocked all images. He sat in the lotus position
and breathed rhythmically. At length he felt a slight movement
at the base of his spine as though a mouth had opened. The
feeling moved up his spine and he felt coolness gradually spread
thtough his body. Rhythmic waves moved upward, seeming to
expand and destroy his body at the same time. As the waves of
burning ice reached his throat and moved even higher, he felt
as though he were about to be pushed into a vacuum that would
consume his ego and obliterate his identity. He thought he was
going to be torn apart by opposing forces. He was overcome
with terror: he was on the threshold of death, standing at the
edge of the abyss. He resisted with all his strength, for he felt
something trying to push him over. And then he crossed over
in a fiery chariot. For a while he knew nothing, but before
long he felt himself falling. He went down faster and faster
until at Jast he floated gently through dark clouds, turning
around and around like a sacrificial victim being toasted over
the flames. He rose again, and crossed over into a region of
thin, high air, where he felt himself light and free in the luminous blue heights.

Then all of a sudden he was once again a prisoner within

18

four walls, already missing the freedom he had begun to enjoy,
He looked at his hands and had the feeling that everything had
happened in a second. At the same time, he had lived for
centuries in remote periods and submerged worlds. He now
had the wisdom with which to open the secret chamber where
the Bird of Paradise lives.

But it wasn’t as easy as he had hoped. Each time the process
was different, and he met new difficulties. He was unable to
make the leap as he had done before. Even though he took
other trips with his alter-ego or astral body, visiting different
regions and meeting beings from other worlds, something always
happened to him at the edge of the moment and he couldn't
go on. His three-dimensional mind or ego retained its identity,
and fought to correct what was happening to him in this alien
world. Two opposed forces or worlds battled each other. One
universe was ancient and submerged; the other floated on the
surface of the waves.

Then one day he was overcome by powerful vibrations which
rose through him as from the base of a tree. He felt the substance
rising faptdly up the trunk and passing into the branches by way
of the secret channels, turning the wheels and making the
flowers bloom. But upon reaching the top, the fluid was stopped:
the ego again asserted itself. The son of life opposed the son
of death. The ego wished to direct events and order them tn its
favor. Once more the disciple found himself caught between
the two forces, half-conscious and paralyzed because his conscious mind was only partly functioning. Since the exit seemed
to be blocked, the vibrations that had been interrupted by the
ego became increasingly violent. He felt he was being destroyed
in a whirlwind and he began to see blood spots.

At that moment a basin of water appeared at his side. As
though obeying a secret command, he plunged his invisible
hands into it and splashed water over his body. The vibrations
diminished and he was soon able to move again. Did the water

come from the river that flows down from the head of Siva
on the top of Mount Kailas?

Exhausted by these experiences, the Kaula disciple didn’t
even want to open his eyes again, He felt he was losing all his
strength. It was as though he had climbed a mountain and was
slipping down the rock face, covered with cold sweat. Then in
the shadows he saw a woman coming toward him. She leaned
over him and wiped his face with the edge of her sari.

He couldn’t tell whether it was an illusion or not. The image
was momentarily clear, but soon vanished. Then he heard a
voice saying: ‘‘I’ve come to take you away.”

Together they lived in a jungle hut and he acted as het
servant, He did the chores, preparing the food and bringing
water from a nearby fountain. Sometimes she would leave without telling him where she was poing. He would wait for her
patiently, and when eventually she came back he would be
happy. She told him about her perfumes and ornaments; in
turn he made her a tiara of flowers and a necklace of turquoises
and sapphires. She taught him how to anoint her with perfumes
and powders. She would then look at herself in the lcokingglass just as the carved goddesses did on the walls of the temple.
When she came back from her mysterious trips, he would wash
her feet in a basin of water he always had ready for her at the
door of the hut.

When night fell, the forest was alive with whispers. They
could hear the howling of the hyenas and the wind beating
against the trees. In a clear, sweet voice she would sing songs
describing divine love. Then they would lie down outside under
a sky heavy with stars. She would sleep on one side, placing her
head in the palm of her hand. He stretched himself out at her
feet.

During this period it seemed as though each of them was
living in a dream world of was acting out the events of some

20

interior life. He felt the woman was becoming a goddess like
one of those carved on the stone walls of the temple. The moon
would wax and wane and still he slept at her feet. She would
tell him about her childhood, about the gyms she had played
with other children.

She also asked him about his childhood and so he told her
about it. He spoke of two childhoods, one taking place just
then, the other relating to a life in a future country in the southern part of the world, She was not surprised by this, but looked
at a distant point in the treetops and spoke of a city known by
the name of Ur. It was there, she said, that she had played with
the other children.

One night she asked him not to sleep at her feet any longer
but to lie down to her left in the bed. The disciple obeyed,
crossed his hands on his chest and gazed up at the deep sky.
She lay on her right side. The next day she went out at dawn
and returned late at night. He was waiting for her, listening
for her to come through the jungle. When. she antived. he
rose and anoimted her feet.

That night she asked him to sleep on her right side, and he
felt her perfumed breast next to his cheek. Nevertheless, he
kept his paze fixed upon the night sky. There he thought he
made out the body of Krishna dancing in the sky-blue garden
of Vrindavan, surrounded by all the milkmaids of the universe
but dancing with only one. |

Days and months went by. She kept taking her mysterious
trips, but each time she came back. Once he asked her where
she had been, and she told him she had been visiting her husband. More and more he realized that she was transforming
herself into some kind of energy inside him. She gave life to
memories he had long carried dormant within him. One night
he dreamed about snow-covered mountains. They were not the
Himalayas but were in the southern part of the world. There
was a woman there with blue eyes and blond hair who looked
through him as though he were transparent. He woke up with

a.

his face covered with tears and realized what he was dreaming
about wouldn’t happen for another thousand years.

She wiped off his tears with her sari and anointed him with
the same care with which he had bathed her feet earlier in the
evening. “Why are you crying?” she asked..

For the first time he looked at her as if she were a stranger.
“Because [ know my wheel is going to turn for another day,”
he answered.

“The wheel of Padmasambhava, who was married on top
of the Tree of Life, also continued to turn,” she replied. “The
secret marriage is a product of pure mental concentration. It
comes from the light of a single star. You gaze at the star, and
if it sends you words spoken by your love, you are married
forever.”

“Tm afraid I have already been married in this way in the
future,” he answered.

That evening she taught him how to kiss. Lying naked on
the grass, she called him to her side. She embraced him with
her long arms and brought her lips to his. Her kiss was so
gentle it was almost unnoticeable in the heavy scent of jasmine.

The following day she left, and he knew she would not teturn that night. He lay down under the tree and began to concentrate. Suddenly he had a doubt: was he dreaming his own life?

On the fine wood floor a new yantra was drawn in gold and
silver, with an outline of colored chalk and powdered sandalwood. Jt had nine entrances, for although it represented the
universe, it also represented a man’s body. It was a maze.
Between the yantra and the entrance to the temple, a triangle
was drawn, and then, one by one, a circle, 2 hexagon and a
square, Meanwhile old women and wise men consulted the stars
and the moon for a propitious day. Over the yantra stood a
tripod on which a chalice was balanced. Several exquisite dishes
and two carafes of wine and water were on the floor.

22

When night came, the Kaula disciple arrived wearing a white
tunic. His hair fell over his shoulders and smelled of powders,
ashes and oil. He caught sight of the yantra and began a dance
that was supposed to represent the flight of the Bird of Paradise.
He danced around the yantra looking for the particular private
entrance that celated to himself, -and when he found it, he
stopped.

The doors then opened, and the witnesses came in accompanied by their women. They placed themselves around the
_ citcle with ritualistic flourishes, carefully avoiding the center.
There was a long wait before the woman appeared, but finally
she came in, attended by her assistants and wearing a long cloak.
Her eyes were closed and she looked as though she were asleep,
but she entered the yantra without hesitation or confusion. Her
assistants did so as well.

He and she then sat down together. After a moment a voice
was heard ordering that the feast should begin. The food was
consecrated with manttams sung by the servants and witnesses.
The water and the wine were then consecrated with elaborate
pestutes, turning them into ambrosia, which is at once the blood
of the sun and the moon, and the sperm which brings about the
second creation of the twice-born.

The wine was then poured into the chalice, and the mantram
of the sun was recited:

Kang, Bang, Tapinyai, Namah

Kang, Bang, Tapinyai, Namah

Gang, Phang, Ngang, Nang

Chang, Dhang, Jhang, Tang, Nyang
Nang, Thang, Dang, Thang, Dang

After that, the glass was filled three-quarters full with wine,
the rest with water. Then came the mantram of the moon:

-Ung, Soma, Mandalaya,
Shodasha, Kalatmane, Namah

23

The wine was now turned into nectar, destroying the curse

which had made it poisonous for centuries. It was now a magic
potion which allowed those who drank it to cross the threshold.
For this reason it was known as the blood of the sun and the
moon, :
Flowers representing the man and the woman were then
thrown into the liquid, and they began to drink from two
glasses, passing them back and forth. Another mantram beginning with the letter G in honor of Ganesh was recited. With
the first glass of wine, the couple ate cooked meat; with the
second, fish; with the third, cereal. The ritual had transformed
these forbidden foods into the flésh of a god, As they drank
the fifth glass of wine, the witnesses sang and a brass horn was
blown. After that, there was no more drinking. An invisible
voice described the fragrant forests and flowery meadows of
Mount Kailas, where Siva and Parvati danced during their
magic wedding.

- The Kaula disciple and the woman then tose, letting their
clothes fall to the ground. A servant brought a basin of water,
As they began to bathe each other, the chorus described the
body of the woman: it was a pleasure garden, a2 temple of the
sun and moon. Her stomach was a sacrificial altar: her vulva
held the fiery dreams of two worlds. Her hair was sacramental
giain, while the soft fuzz on her arms and Jegs was like summer
wheat. Her full breasts were volcanoes which strike fear among
those who live in the fields below, and her long legs were roads
along which the pilgrim passes. Her eyes were stars, her lips
milk and honey.

She then spoke: “I have fire within my lips. Come and drink
it with yours, Be quick, my love; do not hesitate.”

Then for a moment they seemed to fall into a trance because
the watet was pure ambrosia.

After leaving the bath they were crowned as king and queen,
holding staffs or scepters in their hands. The disciple then sat
down with his legs crossed. The woman was lifted up by her

24

assistants, who held her with her legs apart. They raised her to
the level of the disciple’s face, and then gradually lowered her
along his body, touching all its different centers or flowers, until
she finally slipped smoothly over his lingam.

The man felt as though he had penetrated the woman to her
deepest interior region, She then began a slow rhythmic movement, while her assistants, who were also naked, reproduced
the gestures and actions that are carved on the temple walls of
Khajuraho. They were an ensemble, moving together in a tising
cadence, while someone sang:

Pure man

only woman remains

when everything else is lost

All the others have died

even the open eyes of the Great One
have closed

The rhythm increased and grew more intense.

The scourge of Smara

plays with fire

and dances on funeral pyres

She wears a crown of human skulls
Bless her, praise her!

She gives control

She guides the vague

She delights the brothers of Kaula
She leads them

weeping with joy

to a lake full of nectar

and to the top of Mount Kailas
Bless her, praise her!

For a moment, she seemed to be losing control and began to

cry out. But then her lips found the hero’s, and she played
rapidly on him with her tongue. The chorus continued:

25

Hotror and beauty

Her body is Durga’s forest
Daughter of Matanga
Wife of Brahma

Kumari, Lakshmi

Pure, pure

Concentrating with all his force on the space between his
eyebrows, he participated in every detail of the drama, feeling
the woman entirely from within, his lips on hers, her legs
embracing him and her arms around his neck. While embracing
her, he also tried to protect her from herself, by quictly making
a sign with his free hand. But the maddening rhythm of the
woman neatly undid him, taking him along with her in its
frenzy. It was the moment of his greatest trial, and he knew he
must discover a way out through some new inspiration. At that
moment he thought of the dead priestess, and as he did so, his
semen penetrated himself, moving inward toward the base of
the tree, where it wakened the fiery serpent. Like liquid flame,
it moved up the trunk of the tree, opening the flowers of his
garden along the way and releasing cosmic music.

He then opened his eyes and with infinite tenderness held.
the woman and calmed her.

But the feast was not yet over, since the witnesses had to
dirie, and their celebration was his own flesh.

26